The USA has the world's wildest weather. A normal year brings hurricanes, 
blizzards, +100 F heat, -20 F cold, jungle humidity desert dryness, and the world's most 
numerous and strongest tornadoes. Dangerous weather hits other countries, of course, but 
no other nation copes with all the kinds of bad weather in nature's arsenal.
Farmers, hikers, sailors and pilots need to know how to read the weather. Everyone 
can benefit from being weatherwise. If you know some basics, keep your eye on the sky, 
and stay tuned to forecasts, you can be out of the way if the weather turns deadly.
People who know that a Category 3, hurricane can bring a surge of water 12 feet 
above the highest tides will quickly flee an approaching storm. Someone who knows the 
tornado watch just announced on the radio means conditions are ripe for tornadoes and 
then sees a thunderstorm with a rotating wail cloud will be well-sheltered when the 
twister hits. If you know how heat and humidity combine to put deadly strain on your 
body you'll pass up the tennis match on a steamy day.
In terms of numbers of people affected and the costs, weather and weather forecasts 
are more important today than they were 100 years ago. In the 1800s a Midwestern 
blizzard could be deadly for those caught out-side. Farmers and ranchers sometimes got 
lost between the house and barn and froze to death. Those dangers still exist. In addition, 
a blizzard today could strand more than 150,000 at Chicago's O'Hare airport for hours, 
not to mention the thousands of people in cars - from interstates to side roads - blocked 
by snow.
When cars and airplanes replaced trains as our main way of getting around, weather 
gained more potential to snarl lives. Just to melt ice on roads, the U.S. uses an estimated 
10 million tons of salt each year.
Weather is a factor in about 40 percent of all aviation accidents. In the late 1980s the 
airline industry estimated that all delays cost airlines about 53 billion a year and that 
about 70 percent of those delays were weather related.
The airlines also say that improved forecasts of winds at high altitudes, where 
jetliners fly could save about $90 million a year in fuel costs.
According to Richard Hallgren, the thriving, private weather-forecasting industry in 
the United States reflects not only our interest in weather, but also the wide variety of 
weather across America. Hallgren was the head of the National Weather Service from 
February 1979 to May 1988 before becoming executive director of the American 
Meteorological Society.
While weather forecasting is a government monopoly in the rest of the world, it's a 
$100 million-a-year private business in the United States. And that is in addition to the 
government's wide-ranging weather forecasting services. Hallgren says there's enough 
weather work for private firms to concentrate on specialized forecasts for groups such as 
news media, state and local governments, utilities or agriculture, while the National 
Weather Service handles observations and issues general forecasts and warnings of 
dangerous weather.
Keep in mind that to make their specialized forecasts, the private firms depend on 
National Weather Service observations and generalized forecasts.
In most other countries, which have much less dangerous weather, government 
weather services would have far less to do if private firms did as much as they do in the 
USA, Hallgren says. Great Britain offers a good example of the ability of government 
weather services to keep most of the work to themselves. Even as Margaret Thatcher's 
government was shifting the water, gas and electric industries from government to private 
operation in the 1080s, the government kept control of weather forecasting. Closer to 
home, Canada, which is influenced by the United States in many ways, has only a tiny 
private weather-forecasting industry.

Weather watchers
Even if you aren't trying to change airplanes at O'Hare the day a blizzard hits, it is 
likely to he news no matter where you live. Blizzards, tornadoes, hurricanes, and heat and 
cold waves are always news. Americans' fascination with weather began with the first 
explorers and hasn't diminished since. Encounters with raging storms made for rip-
roaring tales in the early days just as they make interesting news stories now.
"We discovered the winde and waters so much increased with thunder, lightning, and 
raine, that our mast and sayle blew overboard and such mighty waves overracked us... 
that with great labour we kept her from sinking by freeing out the water," Captain John 
Smith wrote of his 1606 voyage to Chesapeake Bay. "Two dayes we were inforced to 
inhabite these uninhabited Isles which for the extremitie of gusts, thunder, raine, stormes, 
and ill weather we called Limbo."
Today we don't have to wait for an explorer to return home and write a book to hear 
about "extremitie of gusts, thunder, raine, stormes, and ill weather." Thanks to video 
recorders, any tornado that approaches a town with more than a few hundred people is 
likely to he captured on tape, and maybe end up on television. Today a regular viewer of 
the evening news anywhere in the United States is likely to see more tornadoes in a 
couple of years than a 19th century centenarian would have seen in a lifetime in Kansas.

The USA's temperate climate
While America's weather makes for rousing stories, the climate, the long-range 
average of the day-to-day weather, is no less important to people.
Since Cape Cod is as far south as the Mediterranean Coast of France and northern Italy, 
the first explorers of what is now the United States expected the weather to be milder 
than England's. But the geography of weather is more complicated than distance from the 
poles or equator.
Since it stretches from the tropics (Hawaii) to well north of the Arctic Circle 
(northern Alaska), the United States is guaranteed to see any kind of weather found 
anywhere outside the Antarctic.
Geography grants small favors: America never turns as cold as the South Pole. Even 
without the southern-most and northernmost states, however, the United States has a 
variety of weather unmatched by even larger nations such as the Soviet Union and China.
The quip often heard as hitter winds howl across the Plains sums up one reason why 
we have such variety: There's nothing between us and the North Pole hut a few barbed 
wire fences. You can say almost the same thing, substituting "Gulf of Mexico" for "North 
Pole," on steamy Plains days.
Invasions of extremely cold and extremely hot air give the central United States the 
world's most violent thunderstorms and tornadoes. Europe and Asia avoid such violent 
storms because mountain ranges across both continents keep polar and tropical air from 
colliding as often and as violently as in North America.
Westerly winds from the relatively mild Atlantic Ocean keep Western Europe 
warmer than places much farther south in North America. And the Alps hinder 
tropical air from moving northward. All of Western Europe doesn't see annual 
temperature swings to match those of North Dakota.

A deadly merger
Sometimes tropical and mid-latitude weather systems gang up on the United States. 
When Hurricane Agnes hit Florida's Gulf Coast June 19,1972, it was a weak hurricane 
with winds a little above 74 mph. After doing relatively minor damage to Florida, it 
tracked across Georgia, the Carolinas and Virginia into the Atlantic. Agnes then 
turned hack to the northwest across Long Island into central New York where it 
merged with a mid-latitude storm.
The merger was deadly. By the time the rain ended, some of the highest floods in 
years across the Northeast had sent the storm's death toll soaring to 120 and the damage 
to more than $4 billion.
This isn't to complain about the United States' overall weather. Far from it. In fact, 
the climate has to he counted among the natural resources that made the nation's 
settlement and growth possible.

Early America's weather explorers
Francis Higginson, one of the First settlers in Massachusetts, put it this way: The 
temper of the air of New England is one special thing that commends this place. 
Experience does manifest that there is hardly more that agrees better with our English 
bodies. Many that have been weak and sickly in old England, by coming hither, have 
been thoroughly healed and grown healthful and strong. For here is an extraordinary clear 
and dry air that is of a most healing nature to all such as are of a cold, melancholy, 
phlegmatic, rheumatic temper of body.
In the summertime, in the midst of July and August, it is a good deal hotter than in 
old England; and in winter, January and February are much colder, as they say; but the 
spring and autumn are of middle temper.
When President Thomas Jefferson sent Meriwether Lewis and William Clark 
westward to explore from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Northwest, one of their 
tasks was to report on the weather and climate.
On Dec.11, 1804, when the explorers were near what is now Bismarck, N.D., Lewis 
wrote in his journal: The weather became so intensely cold that we sent for all the hunters 
who had remained out with Captain Clark's party, and they returned in the evening 
several of them frostbitten. The wind was from the north and the thermometer at sunrise 
stood at twenty-one below 0, the ice in the atmosphere being so thick as to render the 
weather hazy and give the appearance of two suns reflecting each other.
On April 1,1805, Lewis wrote about something that strikes any first-time visitor to 
the West: The air is remarkably dry and pure in this open country; very little rain or 
snow, either winter or summer. The atmosphere is more transparent than ever observed it 
in any country through which I have passed.
Early explorers in the West also encountered tornadoes on the Plains. While 
tornadoes, or whirlwinds, are seen in Europe and the eastern United States, those on the 
Plains are more awesome. First, they're larger and more violent. Also, the clear sky and 
generally flat land allow you to see more of the thunderstorm and the tornado than you 
usually see in the East.
Once as the storm was raging near us, we witnessed a sublime sight, Father Pierre 
Jean de Smet, a Belgian priest traveling with a party of settlers from Indiana to 
California, wrote in 1841. He was describing an experience on the Plains before reaching 
the Rockies. A spiral abyss seemed to suddenly be formed in the air. The clouds followed 
each other into it with such velocity, that they attracted all objects around them. The 
noise we heard in the air was like that of a tempest.
The column appeared to measure a mile in height; and such was the violence of the 
winds which came down in a perpendicular direction, that in the twinkling of an eye the 
trees were torn and uprooted, and their boughs scattered in every direction. But what is 
violent does not last. After a few minutes, the frightful visitation ceased. The column, not 
being able to sustain the weight at its base, was dissolved almost as quickly as it had been 
formed. Soon after the sun re-appeared, all was calm and we pursued our journey.

Folk forecasting
The explorers and settlers who learned about North America's weather and climate 
were continuing a tradition that goes back to the dawn of the human race. People always 
have been concerned with the weather and those most directly affected, such as farmers 
and sailors, developed rules of thumb for forecasting what the weather would do in the 
future. One of the most famous - and sometimes true - is:

Red sky in morning, sailor take warning. Red sky at night, sailor's delight.

The rhyme works in most of the United States where storms generally move from 
west to east. The red refers to the sky overhead, not at the horizon. The red is caused by 
sunlight reflecting off clouds.
To have a red sky in the morning, the eastern horizon has to be clear, while clouds 
are moving in from the west. Since that's where storms come from, a storm could be 
heading your way.
To have a red sky at sunset, clouds have to have moved away from the western 
horizon - heading east. Since the storm is moving east, clear skies are coming your way.
Red sky in the morning only works when a storm is on the way. You can have a red 
sky - morning or night - caused by non-storm clouds. Also this rhyme can't predict 
thunderstorms that develop in an afternoon when the morning has been clear.
Generations have developed folk-forecasting techniques and handed down myths 
about weather. These often made the things happening in the sky manifestations of 
deities. It is certainly natural enough to think of lightning as a display of an angry god.

Science takes hold
As most people were going about their lives using traditional, folk-forecasting 
techniques, a few men and women were developing what we now call science, including 
the scientific study of the atmosphere. The invention of the barometer in 1643 was the 
beginning of true scientific study of weather Progress was slow, however. The modern 
understanding of storms didn't start until the 1920s. Even now, scientists continue 
breaking ground. Meteorology still has many unanswered questions.
The invention of the telegraph in 1837 made the first weather-forecasting services 
possible. Finally people could know instantly what was going on more than a few miles 
away Observations showed that storms usually move more or less from west to east. 
Reports by telegraph from places to the west gave some idea of what was coming. These 
were the first forecasts.
Telegraph networks, and the widespread observations they encouraged, boosted 
more scientific forecasting. Still, until well into the 20th century weather forecasting was 
mostly what scientists call empirical or weak in theory. Meteorology was mainly a 
descriptive science. Study of observations had shown that rain or other kinds of weather 
were often associated with certain patterns of atmospheric pressure or changes in 
pressure. These observations were linked to certain kinds of weather but little theory and 
mathematical calculation were involved.
Without theory, most scientific effort went into describing weather and apparent 
connections among meteorological events.
Weather forecasting didn't become scientific until the period around World War I. At 
that time a group of scientists, led by the Norwegian physicist Vilhelrn Bjerknes, 
developed both a picture of the atmosphere and forecasting methods based on the laws of 
physics. Some of Bjerknes' students brought these techniques to American universities 
and the U.S. Weather Bureau in the 1930s. Though some of the scientific laws they used 
had been worked out by Isaac Newton around 1700, they never had been applied to 
weather forecasting.
You could argue that scientific forecasting didn't become possible until the invention 
of the computer in the 1950s. Computers quickly solve the mathematical equations of 
atmospheric movements that scientists had developed by the 1930s.
People like to joke about forecasts that have been totally wrong, and most people can 
give some notable examples. But those who pay close attention know that weather 
forecasting has improved over the last few years.
In general, forecasters are better at saying what large-scale weather patterns will be 
like in three or four days than they were a decade ago. But predicting what small, often 
fierce, events such as thunderstorms will do in the next two or three hours is still difficult. 
Snowstorms can be especially troublesome, as Hallgren was reminded one holiday when 
he was still head of the National Weather Service.
On Veterans Day Nov.11, 1987, weather forecasters were predicting that a winter 
storm would bring about an inch of snow to Washington, D.C. Hallgren, an avid 
woodworker decided to help his son install cabinets at his office.
Before the day was out we were in the bulls-eye of the storm. There were 16 inches 
on the ground. The director of the National Weather Service had believed his office's 
forecast and was snowbound. I thought afterward, good thing that didn't get out.
As it turned out, the snow was 16 inches deep only over a small area. A few miles 
away - at Hallgren's house - the snow was only three inches deep and some places had 
only an inch or two. A forecast for 16 inches of snow would have been way too high for 
most of the area. I went over those charts closely and I wound up siding with the 
forecaster, Hallgren says. This shows how small scale the significant {weather events) 
are.
New technology and the resulting new forecasting techniques promise to improve 
predictions of small-scale events. In the future forecasters may well say: Expect 15 inches 
of snow on the city's north side by evening; only six inches on the south side. But fore-
casting will never be perfect and no one expects to be able to give detailed forecasts far 
thunderstorms or local variations in snowstorms more than a few hours in advance. But 
with some knowledge of how our atmosphere works, anyone can learn what realistically 
to expect from a forecast.

Becoming weatherwise
The next four chapters explain some of the basic science behind our weather:
?	 the effects of heat and cold,
?	 how winds begin and drive our weather
?	 what happens when hot and cold air masses clash, and
?	 how clouds and precipitation are created.
After looking at the basic science, we'll look at how the nature of the atmosphere and the 
country's unique geography combine to create the United States' weather.

