
When winds begin moving great seas of cold or warm air away from the regions where 
they form, air masses come into conflict. The arrival of a new air mass means the old one 
has to be shoved out of the way. There's a war on.
The place where air masses clash is called a front, a concept based on battle fronts, 
developed by Norwegian meteorologists after World War I. Fronts are often the scene of 
the most dramatic weather changes and sometimes the most violent weather. Weather 
fronts can stay in place or move. When they move, one air mass is advancing, another 
retreating.
When the warmer air is advancing, the boundary is a warm front. When the colder 
air is taking over, it's a cold front. When neither side is winning, it's a stationary front.
Fronts normally are parts of larger weather systems centered on areas of low-
atmospheric pressure. They are parts of weather systems often called storms. The word 
storm is used in so many ways, however, that it's often confusing. The large-scale 
weather systems can be the cause of snowstorms. They can cause small-scale 
thunderstorms or dust storms. In this chapter we'll use storm to refer to these large-scale 
systems that include fronts.
The scientific name for such a storm is extratropical cyclone. Extratropical means the 
storm forms outside the tropics.
Storms that form in the tropics are different in some fundamental ways - notably, 
they don't have fronts. Cyclone refers to any weather system with winds around a low-
pressure area. But that term, too, can be confusing. People in the Midwest once called 
tornadoes cyclones - that use is dying out - and today tropical cyclones in the Indian 
Ocean are usually called cyclones. Both tornadoes and Indian Ocean tropical cyclones are 
particular kinds of cyclones.
While big storms can close down several states with wind-driven snow, whip up 
waves that sink ships, or flood hundreds of square miles, most storms do little damage. 
They move cold air southward and warm air northward, helping the Earth balance its heat 
budget. They bring needed rain and snow.

How a storm picks up energy
Extratropical cyclones draw much of their energy from temperature contrasts created 
by the sun's unequal heating of the Earth. While such contrasts are strongest along fronts, 
storms don't need fronts to form.

When conditions are right, gravity pulls cold, heavier air under warmer, lighter air. 
Contrasts between warm and cold air have potential energy, just as a skier at the top of a 
slope has potential energy. When the skier pushes off and starts down the slope, her 
potential energy becomes kinetic energy - energy of motion, When something happens to 
start warm and cold air masses moving over and under each other their potential energy 
becomes a storm's kinetic energy.

Energy is added to storms when air rises, and the water vapor in it begins condensing 
into clouds and precipitation. When water vapor condenses or turns into ice, it releases 
heat called latent heat. This heat adds to a storm's energy. Also, storms draw some energy 
from the high-speed winds of the upper atmosphere.
After a storm starts, the winds can pull in more cold air and warm air, enhancing the 
temperature contrasts and keeping the storm going. A storm's wind speeds depend on the 
differences between air pressures around the storm and in its low-pressure center. The 
greater the difference, the stronger the winds. Another factor also comes into play Think 
how a spinning ice skater can speed up or slow down by pulling in her arms or holding 
them out. When the skater pulls in her arms, she spins faster. When she holds them out, 
she spins slower. Scientists call this the conservation of angular momentum and it works 
for storms too. As winds spiral into a low-pressure area they make a smaller and smaller 
circle. Like the ice skater who pulls her arms in, the winds spin faster.

Getting a picture of a storm
Until the first weather satellite started sending photos to Earth on April 1, 1960, no 
one had ever seen an entire extratropical cyclone. Even airplanes couldn't get above the 
storm to get a full picture. But before satellites, scientists had been piecing together the 
giant puzzle of how storms form and move.
Benjamin Franklin took some of the first steps toward creating the picture of storms 
we have now In the 18th century people thought their local storms were isolated events - 
the winds would bring clouds and then rain or snow; or maybe the storm would spring up 
in their area. People didn't see storms as pants of large, moving, organized systems of 
wind, clouds and precipitation. Ben Franklin began questioning this view in 1743. 
Franklin, in Philadelphia, and his brother James, in Boston. were set to watch a lunar 
eclipse. But the night of the eclipse, clouds combined with winds from the northeast to 
block the view in Philadelphia.
Franklin was amazed later to find out from his brother that the storm didn't arrive in 
Boston until after the eclipse. If the northeast winds brought clouds, the clouds should 
have covered Boston first.
Franklin wrote about it to the Rev. Jared Eliot in Connecticut:	"… tho' the Coarse 
(sic) of the Wind is from N.E. to S.W., yet the Coarse of the Storm is from S.W. to N.E. 
i.e. the Air is in violent motion in Virginia before it moves in Connecticut, and in 
Connecticut before it moves at Cape Sable, &c."

This is a good description of the movement of most storms along the East Coast. But 
instead of seeing the storm as a system of counterclockwise winds moving up the coast, 
Franklin thought it began with warm air rising over the Southeast and Gulf of Mexico to 
be replaced by air from the north.
During the 19th century, scientists realized that storms were systems with circular 
winds. But they, like Franklin, believed the energy source was warm air rising straight up 
at the center - this is true of thunderstorms and hurricanes, but not extratropical storms.
By the 1920s, those Norwegian meteorologists who gave us the word front had also 
worked out an overall picture of storms. They recognized the role of temperature 
contrasts as the key energy source. Their picture of storms was so good we still use it 
every day Each time you see a television weather map marked with Ls and Hs, and lines 
showing fronts radiating out from an L, you're looking at the Norwegians' work: their 
World War I era picture of storms.

The changes fronts bring
The changes fronts bring depend on the season and location. A summer cold front in 
Oklahoma could push out 90 F air with 70 F air. A winter cold front in Colorado could 
replace 40 F air with 20 F air. Temperatures after a summer warm front arrives might be 
in the 90s in New York. A winter warm front might raise temperatures only into the 30s 
in Wisconsin.
While fronts are named for temperatures, they don't always bring big temperature 
changes. For example, in the summer a cool air mass that forms over northwest Canada 
won't be nearly as cold as a winter air mass. But it will be dry. As the air mass moves 
toward the Midwest or Northeast, it is warmed as it passes over ground heated by the 
summer sun. But it picks up very little water. Imagine that Detroit has been sweltering in 
90 F afternoon temperatures, 60 percent relative humidity at noon and overnight 
temperatures in the 70s. After the summer cold front arrives, the afternoon temperature 
might still reach 87 F but the afternoon relative humidity is only around 40 percent and 
the temperature that night falls into the 50s. It has brought comfort, not cold.

While the temperature might not change much, meteorologists have other ways of 
determining when a front has passed through. First, the wind changes direction. A cold 
front will usually cause a wind shift from southwest to northwest; a warm front brings a 
shift from southeast to southwest. A barometer shows falling pressure - it might not be 
much - before the front passes and then a rise after the front goes through.

The term storm front is often used on the West Coast, but you won't find the term in 
meteorological glossaries. Storm front is usually used to describe what is, strictly 
speaking, an occluded front or a cold front moving in from the Pacific. The air that is 
moving in is usually chilly, humid Pacific Ocean air, which causes clouds and 
precipitation.
Back-door cold front is a weather term in the Northeast. Most cold fronts across the 
United States move northwest to southeast. But sometimes a cold air mass east of the 
Appalachians will move down the East Coast from the Northeast. It's coming from the 
wrong direction, through the hack door.

The paths storms follow
Cold-weather storms are normally the strongest because the temperature contrasts 
are the greatest. While strong winds with below-zero temperatures are blowing snow 
across the Dakotas, Illinois and Indiana can be in the 50s and 60s. A strong, winter storm 
literally could affect the entire United States - including Alaska and Hawaii - in a single 
week of tracking across the country.
Since storms draw much of their energy from temperature differences, the boundary 
between warm and cold air is a favored path for storms. From the fall into the spring, 
storm centers move across the United States, often across the South as well as the North. 
In the summer, storm centers are more likely to track across Canada with the fronts 
trailing down across the northern United States. Thunderstorms, not extratropical 
cyclones, bring the United States much of its summer rain.

Tracking a storm
The picture of a typical storm and its movement (previous four pages) helps explain 
the day-to-day weather.
A few hundred miles east of an advancing warm front, high, thin cirrostratus clouds 
will create a halo - a circle of light - around the sun or moon. As the front comes closer, 
the clouds grow lower and thicker and turn the sky gray. A few hours later even lower 
clouds arrive with rain or snow.
What happens then depends on whether you're north or south of the storm's center as 
it passes by. When a storm's center passes by to the north, as shown for Des Moines, 
Chicago, Detroit, Buffalo and Albany in the illustration on the previous pages, clouds and 
precipitation arrive ahead of the warm front. The weather turns warmer and may clear up. 
More clouds, perhaps thunderstorms, arrive. Finally the weather turns colder and begins 
to clear.
If the storm's center is south of you, clouds will become lower and thicker with rain 
or snow lasting around 12 to 24 hours. The precipitation will taper off to showers or snow 
flurries, the air will remain cold and the sky will clear. You'll never be in the storm's 
warm air.
During some winters, storms seem to follow the same paths. They are being guided 
by jet-stream patterns that become established for long periods. A winter with most 
storms east of the Mississippi, moving from Texas to the Great Lakes, will give warm, 
rainy days to the East Coast. A year with winter storms moving along the Atlantic Coast 
east of the Appalachians will be cold arid snowy for the mid-Atlantic and Northeast 
states. A winter that sees most Pacific storms hitting Canada's west coast, instead of 
California, will be dry in the Sierra Nevada and could leave ski areas in the southern 
Rockies wishing for snow.

Upper atmosphere triggers
To understand storms and forecast when they will form and what they will do, you 
have to know what's going on above 10,000 feet.
As we saw in the drawings on Page 47, fronts - and the storms that they are part of - 
extend high into the atmosphere. It's not surprising that high-altitude winds help supply 
energy' for such storms. They also help determine where and when storms form, how 
they grow and decay and where they travel.
In the 1920s and 1930s, scientists began exploring the upper atmosphere with kites, 
balloons and airplanes. By World War II weather stations around the globe were making 
upper-air observations. Today no meteorologist would think of trying to make a weather 
forecast without extensive upper-air measurements.
Jet streams are the cores of the general west-to-east flow of winds in the upper 
atmosphere. As the drawing below shows, these winds not only flow west to east, but 
also often make excursions to the north and south. In the drawing we see that these winds 
make wavy patterns. A closer look shows long waves with crests and troughs thousands 
of miles apart and short waves, ripples on the long waves.
Let's look at how both affect the weather.

Long waves and short waves
The wary course followed by upper-altitude winds, including jet streams, is 
important to weather. Some-times a global pattern like that shown below will stay in 
place for days. The long-wave troughs of cold, low-pressure air ate associated with 
generally cool, cloudy weather The warmer high-pressure ridges usually bring warm, 
clear weather The pattern shown here would bring the West good weather while the East 
is cloudy and chilly.

Most of the time the long-wave pattern drifts eastward under 10 mph. In this case, 
the nice weather from the West would move eastward while the trough over the Pacific 
would move into the West with clouds and maybe a storm. On rare occasions the pattern 
drifts westward. This is called retrograding.

The long waves generally guide storms and determine whether temperatures will be 
cold or warm. Short waves help stir up storms arid precipitation. Also remember while 
the waves are standing still or moving slowly, the winds that create the wavy, patterns 
can be roaring at jet-stream speeds.
When forecasters talk about an upper-air disturbance or a package of upper-air 
energy, they are often referring to a short wave that's moving along as a ripple on the 
long-wave pattern.
But sometimes forecasters might be talking about a trough passing overhead. As the 
drawing on page 55 shows, an upper-air trough is where cold, low-pressure air dips 
toward the equator. Even though the surface weather map might not show any fronts, a 
trough can act like a front in many ways. The sky could turn cloudy: rain or snow might 
fall. The wind might shift as it does when a front passes. Upper-air troughs can bring bad 
weather even through the surface weather map doesn't show any storms or fronts.

Convergence and divergence
Air coming together at any place is said to be converging. Air that's flowing apart is 
diverging. Areas of convergence and divergence in the upper atmosphere are keys in 
determining where high and low pressure will form and grow on the surface.

Changes in the speed or the direction of winds in the upper atmosphere can cause 
convergence or divergence. One place where convergence occurs is that point where the 
jet stream changes from a counterclockwise to a clockwise flow, such as on the cast side 
of a ridge. Air converging in the upper atmosphere sinks into high pressure at the surface 
below.
On the east side of a trough, on the other hand, the jet stream changes from a 
clockwise to a counterclockwise flow. This causes air to diverge. Air diverging in the 
upper atmosphere causes air to flow upward, strengthening low pressure at the surface. 
This is why storm centers tend to form on the east side of upper-air troughs.
Other factors can cause upper-air convergence or divergence, and all of them can 
affect high- and low-pressure areas below. The path and speed of the winds at around 
18,000 feet help forecasters figure out where storms are heading. In general, surface 
storms will go in the same direction at about half the speed of these winds. This isn't as 
simple as it sounds, however. As a storm strengthens, the upper-air winds can begin 
blowing faster, which helps change the pattern of troughs and ridges. That is one reason 
why storm forecasts sometimes go wrong.

Weather maps and models
Maps of storms, such as those developed by the Norwegians in the early 1920s, are 
idealized concepts. They help people organize and make sense of what otherwise would 
be a confusing jumble of phenomena seen in the sky and gleaned from reports of weather 
at distant places.
Scientists call such drawings models. They not only help us make sense of the world, 
but also help us see things we might otherwise miss. In the past, you might hardly have 
noticed thin, high clouds slowly covering the sky from the west. The illustrations on 
pages 50-53 will help you recognize high, thin clouds as part of a storm system.
Such simple models are the first step toward understanding and forecasting. But they 
are only a first step. Since the 1920s scientists have been building more complicated 
models using mathematics and physics rather than drawings and maps.
Mathematical equations must describe the big picture of an atmosphere bounded on 
the bottom by oceans, plains and mountains and on the top by the vacuum of space. 
Equations must account for the Earth's rotation and its tremendous temperature contrast, 
swirling air motions, heat added and lost, effects of water changing among its liquid, 
solid and vapor fonts and the differences in winds and air pressures from the surface 
upward. These equations must also include interactions between the air and the ocean, 
and the air and land that's wet in some places and dry in others; smooth in some places, 
rugged in others. All these factors - and others not mentioned here - are pushing and 
tugging on each other; making the chain of cause and effect extremely tangled.
It is no surprise that knowledge often outstrips models in meteorology, forcing 
scientists to refine the old models or create new ones.

A more detailed picture
Newspaper and television weather maps show what's known as the synoptic scale. A 
synoptic weather map covers a large area, such as the entire United States, and is a 
snapshot of either what the weather was like at a particular time or a forecast showing 
what it will be doing in the future. Synoptic maps show large features, such as storms 
hundreds of miles across, but can only hint at smaller ones, such as thunderstorms. 
Observations taken at widely scattered weather stations are a good net for catching 
synoptic scale events such as fronts, but miss the details of small disturbances.
Since the 1950s scientists have developed instruments and systems for measuring 
small-scale weather events. They've coined the word mesoscale to describe weather 
systems from two miles to 250 miles across. Mesoscale weather studies offer promise of 
improved forecasts for thunderstorms, tornadoes and snowstorms. Such studies are also 
pushing scientists to refine their models of extratropical cyclones.
Mesoscale storm observations show that the synoptic-scale Norwegian concept of 
fronts and air masses is much too simple. Also, in the Norwegian model, storms act much 
the same over land and sea, but today's scientists are beginning to question that view, 
especially for lows that form over polar oceans. They are also questioning the traditional 
picture of occluded fronts.
The Norwegian model of storms with additions of upper-air movements was easy to 
represent on black-and-white, two-dimensional weather maps or with two-dimensional, 
cross-section views. The next step was to draw different maps for various altitudes, to 
give meteorologists a better visual picture of the weather.
Today's meteorological computers not only race through the complex mathematical 
equations that describe weather; but also can create three-dimensional pictures with 
colors highlighting various measurements. This new technology is helping shape the 
emerging, revised model of storms.

Chicken and egg
No simple picture, then, tells the whole story. Meteorologists must use verbal and 
visual shorthand to communicate with people who aren't atmospheric scientists. 
Sometimes, for instance, a forecaster may say, it's going to turn cold because the jet 
stream is going to dip south. But is the jet stream going to bring cold air south? Or will 
the jet stream dip south because that's where the cold-warm boundary is going to be? For 
while jet streams help guide hot and cold air masses, temperature differences create the 
air-pressure differences that make jet streams in the first place.
The relationship among upper-air winds, locations of cold and warm air and what 
storms are doing is like the chicken and the egg: Which came first? Still, you don't have 
to understand complex models to appreciate how jet streams and storms build the 
framework for other weather events that play themselves out on the atmosphere's stage.

