
To make a quick, uncomplicated weather forecast, look out the window.
If the visibility is 15 miles and there's not a cloud in the sky, you can bet it's not 
going to rain in the next 30 minutes, says William Bonner; an authority on forecasting 
with the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research in Boulder; Col. But if just 
over the horizon, 45 miles away, there's a squall line moving along at 40 mph, one hour 
from now you can get a lot of rain.
Many people, especially in past centuries, studied clouds and winds and were 
sometimes able to say what the next day's weather would be like.
But for good forecasts you need to look farther than over the horizon, and you need 
to know more about the atmosphere than clouds and winds alone can tell. Bonner says 
that if you think in terms of how far you have to see to forecast the weather, a view of 
most of North America is needed to say what's likely tomorrow on the East Coast.
To have any hope of a good forecast for three days from now you need a view of the 
weather all over the Northern Hemisphere. A good five-day forecast requires a view of 
the weather across the whole Earth, Bonner says.
Technology, such as weather radar or satellite pictures, expands the weather horizon. 
A radar set shows a squall line as much as 200 miles away and helps measure how fast 
and in what direction it's moving. Satellites can show storms all over the world.

More needed than a weather view
New observational tools, such as Doppler radar and proposed new satellites, will 
make that view more detailed. But even the best view of worldwide weather doesn't give 
enough information to make a sure prediction of tomorrow's weather.
There are too many things going on. Imagine that a storm heading your way is like a 
bowling ball heading down the alley for the pins. In a regular bowling lane, you could set 
up sensors to measure the exact path and speed of the hall as it leaves the bowler's hand 
and feed the data into a computer program in a few basic laws of physics written as 
mathematical equations and before the ball is halfway down the lane, the computer could 
say which pins are likely to be knocked down.
But this is the Weather Bowling Lane where the ball's motion can change the lane 
itself, point it in a totally different direction. The ball can knock down pins three lanes 
over. And the ball can grow or shrink as it rolls along. How do you predict all that? And 
yet that is simple compared to what is needed for a weather forecast.
Earlier in this book we looked at the building blocks of weather forecasting:
? How the sun heats the Earth unequally, forming warm and cold air masses
? How air-pressure differences cause winds
? How the Earth's rotation and friction change the winds
? How water's phase changes add or take heat away from the air
All of these actions, plus the possible interactions among them, go into making the 
weather. All are condensed into mathematical equations and programmed into weather 
forecasting computers.
This complexity is part of the reason why forecasters, even with global data and 
powerful computers, can produce only a few accurate forecasts for as far as seven days 
ahead.

Producing skilled forecasts
No one can predict the detailed, day-by-day weather more than a week ahead. In fact, 
forecasting skill generally drops off quickly after three or four days. Anyone who claims 
to be able to predict a year in advance, say that June 21 will be rainy while the 22nd will 
be sunny, is pulling your leg.
Meteorologists describe forecasts as skilled or unskilled. A skilled forecast is one 
that does better than methods such as flipping a coin, forecasting that the weather will be 
the same as the 30-year average for a particular day or predicting that a day's weather will 
be the same as yesterday's weather. That's called a persistence forecast.
For example, you could run up a respectable forecasting score in the summer in Los 
Angeles by using persistence. A forecast for no rain and a high in the 80s would work 
day after day. Enough unskilled forecasts that take normal conditions into account - no 
July snowstorms for Los Angeles - can add up to what seems like a respectable score of 
50 or 60 percent correct.
Scientific forecasters don't merely add up the number of times they're correct. They 
see how their forecasts compare to various kinds of unskilled forecasts. Success requires 
doing better than the unskilled forecasts.
For more than seven days ahead, the best forecasters can do now is offer odds of the 
weather being average or some comparison to average - hotter; colder; drier or wetter 
than average for a period such as a week, a month or a season. These forecasts don't try to 
say what each particular day will be like.
Scientists have good reason to believe that despite improvements in observations, 
computers and computer models, detailed forecasts for much more than two weeks ahead 
never will be possible. We'll see why at the end of this chapter when we look at the role 
of chaos in the atmosphere.

Computers move into forecasting
When Ronald McPherson joined the National Weather Service in 1959 - it was then 
the Weather Bureau - the operations manual prohibited us from issuing forecasts beyond 
36 hours. You could issue an outlook for another day. Now we issue forecasts for five 
days and an outlook for six to 10 days. All of that came about largely because of 
numerical weather prediction.
Numerical forecasting means using mathematical equations to predict the weather, a 
job that can be handled only by the world's most powerful computers. In the United 
States this is done at the National Meteorological Center in Camp Springs, Md., which is 
at the heart of weather forecasting in the United States. Ronald McPherson is its director.
Since coming to the NMC in 1968, McPherson has seen computers grow more 
powerful, allowing for improvements in the computer models used for forecasting. This, 
along with improved observation systems, has led to better forecasts.
The key to computer forecasting in the United States is the National Meteorological 
Center's Cray YMP-832 super-computer, which is able to handle about two billion 
operations a second.
Drawings on Pages 174 and 175 show in general how the center's computers work 24 
hours a day, seven days a week digesting weather information from around the world and 
producing forecasts.
The Cray's output is sent out in the form of about 20,000 different kinds of text and 
around 6,000 graphics, mostly maps, each day. NMC forecasts go to local National 
Weather Service offices, other government agencies and private meteorologists, 
including those at television stations and airlines, and other nations, especially those in 
the Western Hemisphere. The material includes discussions by NMC meteorologists 
comparing how a day's run of the computer models compares to previous runs and how 
the models compare to each other.
These interpretations help other forecasters make their predictions.

Producing local forecasts
NMC predictions are meant for forecasters; they would be of little use to most 
people. In addition to maps and text describing general weather patterns around the 
world, NMC also supplies local Weather Service offices with information about what the 
big weather patterns imply for conditions at each Weather Service location.
This information is used as the starting point for the local and regional forecasts - 
from the Weather Service, private forecasting firms and your local TV weather report. If 
you could watch the television weather in two cities at the same time, you'd be amazed at 
how similar they are, McPherson says. They all do their own forecasts, but they all start 
with our products.
Each of the nation's weather forecast offices produces basic public forecasts, aviation 
forecasts and, if any large bodies of water are in its area, marine forecasts. A primary 
responsibility is alerting people in their areas to potentially dangerous weather, says Jim 
Belville, the meteorologist in charge of the Sterling, Va., office about 30 miles west of 
Washington, D.C. But, as Belville's career shows, each office has to tailor local 
forecasting to its area.
When he was at the Lubbock, Tex., office, Belville wanted to forecast perfectly for 
the Texas Tech football games, big local events at a time of year when the weather 
quickly can turn bitterly cold or kick up a blizzard.
In New Orleans, he prepared special forecasts for the 28,000 people working on oil 
rigs in the Gulf of Mexico, some as far as 200 miles from land. About 1,000 helicopter 
trips are made each day to oil rigs. Their pilots need forecasts for wind speeds at the level 
of the rig decks. Boats serving the rigs need to know when the waves will be over six feet 
high, too rough for them to dock. And, of course, there was always the forecast for Mardi 
Gras to worry about.
In Washington, D.C., Belville says a normal week might include calls from the 
White House, the Secretary of Commerce, four senators and the Air Force band - all 
wondering what the weather will be like for ceremonies or for planned trips.
Shortly before the president of South Korea was to arrive at the White House in 
1991, a thunderstorm began moving across the Washington area. Officials worried about 
lightning hitting the honor guard. Belville's office had a new lightning detection system 
in place that produces a computer display of almost every bolt of lightning hitting the 
ground. The office stayed in contact with the White House, giving them almost a stroke 
by stroke account of the lightning and told them when the danger was past. The honor 
guard took its place in time without having to worry about lightning.

Doppler shows its stuff
Probably the most promising, new weather observation and forecasting technology is 
Doppler radar. Old weather radar showed the location, movement and strength of 
precipitation. It also gave clues about the types of precipitation. Doppler does all that as 
well as measuring wind speed and direction. In addition, the new Doppler radar uses 
computer technology to indicate boundaries between cool and warm air. Doppler radar 
can see a front coming, even when it's not kicking up any precipitation. It also can detect 
winds in clear air.
By the end of October 1991, the new Doppler radar in Sterling, Va., had shown off 
its potential twice, doing things the forecasters hadn't expected.
Saturday, Oct.19, 1991, the Washington, D.C., area was enjoying a beautiful, warm 
day with the Potomac River and Chesapeake Bay crowded with boaters. Early in the 
afternoon the Doppler radar picked up a warm-cool air boundary heading eastward.
We began tracking the front about 30 minutes before it got to the office, Belville 
says, and we had good wind velocities off the Doppler. We timed the movement and 
issued a small-craft advisory for the tidal Potomac and Chesapeake Bay.
Before the front arrived, the winds had been from the south at about 5 mph. Behind it 
winds were 20 to 30 mph, kicking up three- and four-foot waves on the river and bay. It 
was a very, very dangerous situation for small boats. They got notice an hour and a half 
before the front got to them.
Without the new radar, the forecasters would have had no idea about the sudden 
wind shift until the front hit a weather station's wind instruments.
The Saturday before, Belville says, we were sitting here at 6 o'clock in the evening, 
looking at the Doppler wind profile when we started seeing the winds at the 1,000 foot 
level begin to increase. They were very light, about six knots, at the surface. When the 
winds reached 25 knots at 1,000 feet we reissued the terminal forecasts for Dulles, 
(Washington) National and BWI (Baltimore-Washington International) airports calling 
for low-level wind shear.
Within an hour the 1,000-foot winds had reached 40 knots while the winds at the 
ground were still only about 6 knots. We started getting a lot of pilot reports talking about 
low-level wind shear. There were no thunderstorms, just a low-level jet.
Meteorologists have known about such low-level jet streams on the Plains for years, 
but the one detected by the Sterling, Va., radar was one of the first, well-documented 
cases east of the Appalachians. It can be a real hazard, Belville said. Without the 
Doppler, we would have had no idea it was happening until we started getting pilot 
reports.


The new world of local forecasting
Sterling's Doppler radar is part of the NEXRAD (Next Generation Weather Radar) 
network. It eventually will include 160 units, most of them operated by the National 
Weather Service in and near the United States. It also will have a few units at overseas 
military bases.
The first NEXRAD units were put to work at three locations: at the Norman, Okla., 
weather office, near the National Severe Storms Laboratory where Doppler weather radar 
was developed; at Melbourne, Fla., for forecasting space shuttle and other rocket 
launches at the Kennedy Spacecraft Center and at the Sterling, Va., office.
While the NEXRAD radars are designed to track weather for an area stretching about 
125 miles from its base antenna, another radar system is being installed at 45 major 
airports around the country. These Doppler Weather Radars are being purchased by the 
Federal Aviation Administration. Instead of keeping an eye on the big weather picture, 
Terminal Doppler Weather Radars will watch closely for showers and thunderstorms 
likely to produce downbursts at airports, especially the small, but sometimes deadly 
microbursts discussed in Chapter 8. These radars, which are expected to cost about $340 
million, are scheduled to be running at all 45 airports by the middle of 1994.
New radars are just part of the planned Weather Service modernization. New 
weather forecast offices will be located near 115 of the NEXRAD units. A one-year test 
of the new system is expected in the central United States, beginning as early as 1993.
Other technologies to be included in the new system are:
? More data collection points. Automated Surface Observing Systems (ASOS) are 
collections of automated weather instruments. About 1,000 are expected to provide 
surface observations from places without observations now. They will replace human 
observations at some weather stations.
?	Improved satellites. The new Geostationary Operation Environmental Satellite 
(GOES) will take photos of clouds at the same time it is collecting other information. 
Today's satellites can do only one of these at a time. By doing both at the same time, the 
new satellites will send information to forecasters more quickly. The new satellites 
should be able to provide updates every six minutes when severe weather threatens.
?	Aid in handling data. The Advanced Weather Interactive Processing System 
(AWIPS) will help forecasters solve the problem of handling all of the data they receive. 
The system will enable forecasters to combine various kinds of information and to 
highlight areas of interest.
?	Wind profilers. These are special radars that look straight up into the sky, 
measuring wind speeds and directions every six minutes Instead of every 12 hours as 
current weather balloons do.

Other uses of the new systems
The state of Oklahoma is using new, automated weather sensors as part of a much 
wider environmental monitoring network called Mesonet, which it expects to have in 
operation by the end of 1992.
Since Oklahoma is in the heart of tornado country; it has been a center of research 
into new forecasting techniques. Many of the new lands of weather sensors are being 
installed first in Oklahoma and surrounding states.
Oklahoma's Mesonet will include 107 automated stations, at least one in each of the 
state's 77 counties. Every 15 minutes each station will measure temperature, humidity; 
wind speed and direction, air pressure and precipitation - as well as the temperature of the 
soil four inches below the surface. This data will go to a central computer in Norman, 
Okla. Some stations also will measure the amount of solar radiation and soil temperatures 
at other depths.
Data will be transmitted over the Oklahoma Law Enforcement Telecommunications 
System, which links all of the state's law enforcement agencies. This will not be a strain 
on their system, says Ben Crawford, director of the Oklahoma Climatological Survey. 
Every state has a similar system. All we're doing is tapping a resource that's available to 
every other state. The total volume of data we will move in 24 hours is equal to one 
lengthy rap sheet on a criminal.
Crawford says the system will help anyone who needs up-to-the-minute information 
including weather forecasters, highway departments and farmers.
The extra sensors will add to the information avail-able to forecasters as they track 
winter storms and the dangerous thunderstorms of spring and summer. Forecasters 
tracking drought will have day-to-day updates on precipitation all over the state. In the 
past, many volunteer weather observers, whose reports help track slow weather changes 
such as drought, sent in reports only once a month.
With Mesonet a farmer will be able to call up data on a computer and then use a 
special program to decide when to apply crop pesticides. Temperatures and precipitation 
over several weeks are keys to determining how many insects are likely to be eating 
which crops.
The data also will give detailed, current wind information that can make spraying 
safer. Mesonet also should help farmers use irrigation water more efficiently, saving not 
only water; but also fuel and money.
Crawford asserts that the state's $2.7 million investment in getting the network 
running should save at least that much in the first year of operation.
He envisions data also being made available to schools across Oklahoma. It could 
bring a new emphasis to science and math studies at the high school level, turn a few 
more students to science. If nothing else, it will teach them more about the environment. 
At best it could influence them to become scientists.

Some likely forecasting changes
By the middle of the 1990s, McPherson expects the Weather Service to be giving 
probabilities for its forecasts five to seven days ahead. They would say things such as 
there is a 70 percent probability that the temperature will be five to ten degrees above 
normal. This would give people the idea that the most probable condition will be several 
degrees above normal, but also tell them that there is uncertainty and indicate how much 
faith the forecasters have in the prediction.
Once people learn what the probabilities are, they could use them to help make 
decisions. For instance, McPherson imagines the owner of a beach resort calling part-
time employees in the middle of the week and telling them he won't need them for the 
weekend, if the odds are 80 percent for a rainy weekend. But if the odds are only 50 
percent for rain, the owner could say it looks like it might be a bad weekend, but be 
available if you can, might need you. There are a lot of businesses that could be helped 
by a skilled forecast that far ahead.
McPherson also is looking for improvements in the 30-day and 90-day, or seasonal, 
forecasts.
While the forecasts for up to 10 days are made by computers using the laws of 
physics that determine the weather, the 90-day forecasts are more statistical. They rely on 
long-term climate records and correlations between weather patterns existing when the 
forecast is made and how similar patterns have worked out in the past.
In addition to using patterns of winds and air pressure, the forecasters also rely in 
some cases on patterns of sea-surface temperatures. Researchers have found that warmer-
or-cooler-than-normal sea-surface temperatures in some parts of the oceans are linked 
with general patterns of weather in some areas. We'll look at one such link known as El 
Nino in Chapter 12.
Researchers are working on using a computer model that includes interactions 
between the oceans and the atmosphere as part of the forecasts for 30 days and 90 days 
ahead. It will get the physics into the seasonal forecast, McPherson says. We think it will 
provide some useful guidance.

The limits to forecasting
In 1904, Vihelm Bjerknes (1862-1951) stated the basic idea behind using computers 
to forecast weather:
If we know enough about what the atmosphere is doing now and if we know the physical 
laws that govern its movements, we can predict what will happen in the future. During 
World War I, Lewis Fay Richardson (1881-1953) developed the key mathematical 
concepts needed to forecast weather. But until the development of electronic computers 
after World War II, scientists had no practical way to solve the equations.
By the early 1950s, researchers working under John von Neumann and Jule Charney 
at the Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton, N.J., were making simple forecasts 
with computers. These forecasts were showing promise and scientists had every reason to 
expect their forecasts to become better as they improved their computers and learned 
more about the atmosphere's laws.
But even though scientists were learning more and the forecasts were getting better; 
they weren't improving as fast as expected. They weren't keeping up with the growth in 
knowledge and computer power.
One of those looking into the problems of computer forecasts in the early 1960s was 
Edward Lorenz, a theoretical meteorologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT). He had intended to be a mathematician when he graduated from Dartmouth 
College in 1938, but World War II made him an Army Air Corps weather forecaster. At 
MIT after the war, he turned his attention to mathematical and theoretical problems 
involving weather systems.
Lorenz developed a set of equations to mimic some aspects of weather, without 
being as complicated as the real atmosphere. He programmed them into a Royal McBee 
computer and found they created changing patterns much like the weather's.
One day in 1961, Lorenz decided to rerun some results from his computer model, but 
instead of starting at the beginning, with original figures, he started about halfway 
through by entering the numbers he had on a printout. Soon the computer's weather began 
deviating from the first run. Eventually the two patterns hardly resembled each other. Yet 
both had started from the same point.
At first Lorenz thought something was wrong with the computer; but he soon 
eliminated that possibility. Lorenz eventually found that a tiny difference in the numbers 
fed to the computer made a big difference in the results. The computer took calculations 
out to six decimal places, but printed them out only to three places. When Lorenz started 
the new run at the halfway point, he programmed in numbers only to three decimal 
places. This tiny change, for example the difference between 3.461453 and 3.461, was 
enough to change the output drastically.
The unexpected result showed that Lorenz's weather-like system had a sensitive 
dependence on initial conditions. Tiny changes in the data eventually result in big 
changes in the output.
Lorenz says his results were like those being obtained by the University of Chicago 
dishpan experiments that were attracting scientific attention at the time.
In these, a pan is filled with water and put on a turntable. The center of the pan is 
cooled while the rim is heated. Water in the cold center sinks and flows toward the rim 
while warm water at the rim rises and flows toward the center. When the pan is rotated, 
the moving water eventually develops wavy patterns resembling jet-stream winds.
As the speed is increased, the water's movements begin flipping from one kind of 
wavy pattern to another in no apparent order - just like real jet streams, the weather, and 
the results Lorenz found in his computer's output.
Lorenz's work was the beginning of the mathematical theory of chaos, which has 
become important not only in meteorology but in most other sciences.
The theory tells weather forecasters they can never expect to know all of the 
conditions that will affect a prediction. As observations, computers and models are 
improved, forecasts are getting better. But there always will be conditions on too small a 
scale to be observed. If you try to forecast for a long enough period, these conditions 
eventually will make the forecast diverge further and further from reality.
Lorenz says that in the 1960s we knew we weren't making good forecasts. The 
greatest practical use of these results was that they told us where to put our efforts. By 
working on things that will give us improvements in shorter range forecasts, there's a 
better likelihood we will break through. Today, meteorologists believe the ultimate limit 
to detailed day-by-day forecasts is about two weeks.
While chaos means we shouldn't hope for day-to-day forecasts for more than two 
weeks, it doesn't mean we can't forecast anything about weather or climate weeks, 
months or even years from now.
If instead of day-to-day details, you're interested in average conditions, researchers 
have good hope of making useful forecasts for coming seasons. As we'll see in Chapter 
12, climate modelers expect to make years-long predictions about the climate.
These hopes are reasonable because large-scale processes, not small details, 
determine averages. Here's a simple example of how this works. If in the fall the ocean 
near a city is 5 F warmer than normal, and if the wind usually blows from the ocean, the 
winter should be warmer than normal. Oceans cool slowly and each winter day with an 
ocean breeze will be warmer than normal. But this knowledge won't help forecast a 
particular day's temperature more than a few days ahead.
Astronomers, who don't have to worry about chaos in eclipse predictions, are sure 
there will be a very long, total eclipse of the sun across the Caribbean on June 13, 2132. 
If today's thinking about the limits chaos puts on forecasting are correct, the National 
Weather Service of the 22nd century might be able to tell people a year ahead that the 
summer of 2132 will be hot. But the San Juan, Puerto Rico, forecast office won't be able 
to tell tourists where to find clear skies for the eclipse any earlier than two weeks ahead.

