
Rivers and streams have been flooding as long as water has flowed on the Earth. Fur 
thousands of years, humans have settled and farmed on flood plains, where crops thrive 
in the rich, alluvial soils left by receding water.
Along with the advantages, living on rich soil left by past floods brings dangers. 
Places that have flooded before are likely to flood again.
Today we often visit places subject to flooding, without thinking of them as such. 
Many of our finest recreational treasures are next to rivers and streams that sometimes 
flood. Big Thompson Canyon, about 50 miles northwest of Denver is a tragic example of 
what can happen when the waters rise.
Two-lane U.S. Highway 34 runs about 25 miles through the canyon, climbing about 
2,500 feet from near Loveland, Col., to the edge of the town of Estes Park. In some 
places, such as The Narrows at the canyon's east end, the walls jut almost straight up. In 
others, the canyon's sides slope gently enough to support a forest of ponderosa pine and 
Douglas fir. Houses, a few restaurants and other businesses are spread along the road and 
along the Big Thompson River, which is about as wide as two highway lanes.
Saturday July 31, 1976, looked like a perfect day to enjoy being outdoors in Big 
Thompson Canyon. Colorado was celebrating 100 years of statehood with a long 
weekend. The weather was pleasant with only a threat of scattered afternoon and evening 
thunderstorms.
By late afternoon an estimated 2,500 to 3,500 people were staying in or driving 
through Big Thompson Canyon.
At 6 p.m. puffy clouds that had been growing over the Rockies had built into a 
thunderstorm. Most thunderstorms born above Colorado's Rockies drift eastward over the 
Plains. However, the 1976 storm stayed in place as it grew into an unusually efficient 
rain-making machine. As the sun was setting in a partly cloudy sky in most of the rest of 
Colorado, the thunderstorm was sitting atop the slopes that define Big Thompson 
Canyon, pouring out rain.

At Drake, about halfway down the canyon, the river was carrying 137 cubic feet of 
water a second before the rain started at around 6 p.m. By 9 p.m. it was carrying 31,200 
cubic feet of water a second. The National Weather Service estimated that the river's 
headwaters received 10 to 12 inches of rain, around 8 inches fell in less than two hours.

The canyon's steep, rocky slopes absorbed little of the rain. Tiny streams and rivulets 
grew, adding more water to the river. It quickly became deep enough and last enough to 
tumble boulders up to 10 feet across.
The flood washed away much of U.S. 34 and many of the houses and other buildings in 
the canyon.
Victims had little warning. The first alert came about 8:30 p.m. when Colorado State 
Patrolman Bob Miller, sent to investigate reports of rock and mud slides on the highway 
radioed before escaping. Advise them we have a flood. I'm up to my doors in water.
Many people who stayed in their cars died. Others, trapped by the rising water and 
washed-out road, scrambled up the steep canyon walls to shiver in light rain until rescued 
the next day. Those who stayed in their cars had little chance of survival. The roaring 
water smashed vehicles against rocks and ripped them to pieces. State Patrol Sgt. Hugh 
Purdy was killed in the flood. His car was identified a few days later only by a key ring 
labeled Colorado State Patrol.
Survivors described the roar of the river as sounding like jet engines. In The 
Narrows, at the canyon's east end, the water piled up into a 19-foot wall filled with parts 
of cars, buildings and other debris, including hissing propane tanks. The flood-borne 
debris smashed into supports that held up a 227,000-pound water pipe where it crossed 
above the highway and river at the mouth of The Narrows. The flood pulled the pipe, 
filled with an estimated 873,000 pounds of water, from the canyon's walls and carried it a 
quarter of a mile.
The Big Thompson flood killed 139 people; six others were never found. It 
destroyed 418 houses and damaged 138 more. Fifty-two businesses were wiped out. 
Damage was estimated at $35.5 million.
Today, only someone familiar with the canyon before the flood can see any signs 
that it ever happened. Campgrounds, stores, restaurants and motels welcome visitors. 
Permanent and vacation homes still offer a wilderness escape. But now the river has more 
room to spread out than in 1976; people weren't allowed to rebuild in areas that floods are 
likely to scour. Highway signs in Big Thompson and other Colorado canyons are the 
flood's most apparent legacy. They read: Climb to safety in case of a flash flood.

Floods are weather's big killer
The signs give good advice. Floods, especially flash floods, kill more people each 
year than hurricanes, tornadoes, windstorms or lightning. In the 1970s floods replaced 
lightning as weather's big killer. During the 1980s, floods killed an average of 110 people 
a year in the United States; about 60 percent of them died in their vehicles or while trying 
to flee from cars or trucks stalled in rising water.
The experts' advice: First, don't drive into flood waters, even the most innocent 
looking ones. A street a few blocks from home that appears to be under only a foot or two 
of water could become a death trap. The placid-looking water over the road might have 
washed out part of the pavement. You could end up in two or three feet of water and that 
could be enough to wash you away Second, if you're ever blocked by a flooded or 
washed-out road in a canyon or valley, get out of the car and head for higher ground. 
You're better off being cold and wet on a hillside watching a flood carry away your car 
than being in the car as it smashes against rocks.
Some Big Thompson victims were caught in houses, motels or other buildings. Many 
refused to heed warnings from police and others minutes before the flood hit. Experts 
have found that people balk at acting on warnings, or require confirmation before acting 
in almost all disasters. In fact, slowness to act is more common than panic when natural 
disasters hit.
A key home defense against floods is to find out how high the water can rise. Instead 
of relying on neighbors' memories of past floods, check with the local emergency 
management agency or the nearest National Weather Service hydrologist. Flood victims 
commonly say they never thought the water could climb as high or as fast as it did.
More and more places subject to floods are being protected by automated systems 
that sound an alarm when stream levels, amount of rainfall or both exceed dangerous 
levels. Defense against floods includes knowing whether your community has such a 
system and if so, how warnings are passed along.

Flash floods, East and West
Floods like the one that hit Big Thompson are called flash floods because the water 
rises quickly, maybe an hour or less after heavy rain begins. Forecasters often can tell 
when conditions are ripe for flash floods. They issue a watch saying, in effect, watch out, 
be alert for warnings. But they usually have little time to issue a warning, which means a 
flash flood is actually occurring. Floods on larger rivers, in contrast, can often be 
accurately predicted days, or even a week or two, ahead.
While the Big Thompson flood was an extreme event, its causes were typical of 
western floods. The weather had been dry. Hard, dry soil absorbs little water what rain 
does fall almost immediately begins collecting in streams and rivers. In mountains, the 
water quickly drains downhill and can sweep streams that have been dry or nearly dry for 
months. Flood waters can rush miles down streams, to places where the sun has been 
shining all day. Sometimes victims have no reason to think a flood is headed their way.
In the East, where the ground generally absorbs more water, flash floods are more 
likely after the soil has been saturated by long rainy periods or when a quick thaw, maybe 
combined with heavy rain, fills streams with rain and melted snow. Hurricanes and 
tropical storms, which push ocean water inland, can cause flash floods as they dump 
heavy rain inland.
Dam failures are one of the most-feared causes of flash floods, with good reason. 
Two cases:
America's deadliest flash flood hit Johnstown, Pa., May 31, 1889, when a 72-foot-
high, 930-foot long dam broke in the hills about 24 miles upriver from Johnstown. A wall 
of water, which was 76 feet high at one point and 23 feet high when it hit Johnstown, 
roared down the valley into the city. The official death toll was 2,209. The dam, 
completed in 1852, had fallen into disrepair. Repair work in 1879 was done poorly.
Three minutes before midnight March 12, 1928, the 20-foot-high, 700-foot-long St. 
Francis Dam across San Francisquito Canyon, Calif., broke, spilling more than 138,000 
acre-feet of water The flood killed more than 400 people as it washed down the Santa 
Clara Valley to the Pacific Ocean south of Ventura, about 54 miles from the dam. The 
dam, owned by the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power; was only 22 months 
old when it failed. Investigators said the rocks of the canyon's walls weren't strong 
enough to support it.
Since then inspection and regulation of dams, especially large ones, have improved. 
But smaller, uninspected dams can still present a flash flood hazard.

The greatest floods
Rain falling over a wide area or snow melting over a large area is needed to cause 
floods that can cover hundreds of square miles and last for weeks. It's not unusual for 
such floods to be fed in part by individual flash floods in smaller streams feeding into 
rivers.
The Great Mississippi River Flood of 1927 was one of the most damaging ever to hit 
the United States and led to vast improvements in flood control. It began with above-
normal rain. The precipitation for the entire Mississippi River Basin had been above 
normal since the fall of 1926.
Flooding began that fall at Memphis, and the Mississippi stayed high there until the 
spring floods began. By late March the Mississippi and most of the rivers that flow into it 
- such as the Ohio, the Tennessee and the Cumberland - were at flood stage. Major 
flooding began during the first three weeks of April when more than nine inches of rain 
fell on southern Missouri and most of Arkansas. This rain was added to water from 
melted snow coming down the Mississippi from the north.
The river broke through levees along the Mississippi and its tributaries in more than 
120 places, flooding more than 26,000 square miles of land in seven states. In some 
places, the river ran 80 miles wide. The flood forced more than 600,000 people from their 
homes. Since officials could forecast when the flood would arrive - except for unexpected 
levee breaks - most people were warned in time to escape. Still, the flood killed 246 
people.
As a result of the flood, Congress adopted the Flood Control Act of 1928, which 
gave the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers the job of Mississippi River flood control. It led 
to today's elaborate system of reservoirs and better-designed levees. Project engineers 
also straightened the river in places to allow water to flow faster to the Gulf of Mexico. A 
flood way was added on the river's west side near Cairo, Ill., to divert floodwaters from 
the main channel. And the Bonnet Carte Spillway was built north of New Orleans to 
divert some Mississippi water to Lake Pontchartrain instead of allowing it to press 
against the levees and flood walls in New Orleans. The work was finished in time for the 
1937 flood, which exceeded the flows in 1927, but did relatively little damage.

100-year floods
In planning flood protection, hydrologists and engineers talk about 10-year floods or 
100-year floods as a way of assessing the odds of water reaching certain levels. It's all 
based on averages. A 100-year flood describes water levels that, on the average, should 
occur once a century. But having 100-year floods in back-to-back years doesn't mean 
nature is up to something strange. A place could also go a couple hundred or more years 
without a 100-year flood. The best way to think of a 100-year flood is one that has a one 
percent (one in 100) chance of occurring in any given year.

The great droughts
Droughts are a big part of American history, especially in the West. Yet each time a 
major drought arrives, it's almost as though something brand new is happening. For 
instance, the drought that peaked in 1988 encouraged talk about the greenhouse effect 
and global warming.
While it is possible that the Earth's climate is warming up and that a warmer Earth 
would have more serious and prolonged droughts, you don't need to invoke greenhouse 
warming to explain the drought of 1988. A quick look at history shows that nature man-
aged to create droughts as bad as, or worse than, the 1988 drought long before a 
greenhouse effect could have started warming the Earth.
The Homestead Act of 1862 - which gave settlers free tide to 160 acres of land if 
they lived on and cultivated that land for five years - helped set the stage for one of the 
United States' most socially disruptive droughts. Thousands of settlers who moved west 
to the Great Plains in the late 1860s and 1870s didn't realize the region was enjoying an 
unusually wet period.
Railroads promoted settlement with the slogan "Rain follows the plow," which was a 
respectable enough scientific opinion in the middle of the 19th century. There's no doubt 
that growing plants add tremendous amounts of water vapor to the air. And there's good 
reason to believe that denuding the ground of vegetation, as has happened in parts of 
Africa, can help turn the climate drier But, as settlers on the Plains learned during the 
drought that lasted from 1887, to 1896, covering the Plains with crops isn't enough to 
overcome the global climatic patterns that bring droughts.
By 1890, thousands who had set out to find a new life, were fleeing back East or to 
the West Coast. The population of many counties in Kansas and Nebraska dropped by 
one quarter to one half. About 400,000 of the more than a million families who had tried 
to homestead the Plains managed to keep their land.
The next big drought, which affected much of the United States but which hit the 
Plains the hardest, began in 1934 and didn't end until 1941. Two years during this period, 
1934 and 1936, are the country's driest on record. Thousands of acres of land on the 
Plains dried out and turned to dust that at times blew all the way to the East Coast. This 
Dust Bowl, like the one in the 1890s, displaced thousands. This time, however, many 
found jobs working on the huge dams that were being built partly in response to the 
drought.
The drought of 1987-89, which was most severe in the summer of 1988, was in some 
places more severe than the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. But there's no evidence that the 
drought alone forced vast numbers of families off their farms. Loans and other aid 
enabled farmers to hang on even though the drought cut grain production by 31 percent. 
A Plains drought in the 1950s had shown that the aid programs enacted after the Dust 
Bowl meant Plains farmers no longer were forced to abandon their land in large numbers 
as farmers did in the 1890s and 1930s.
This isn't to say the 1987-1989 drought wasn't expensive and painful. The official 
government estimate put the cost at $39 billion and many experts argue that this estimate 
is low. Grain surpluses built up in previous years kept people from going hungry and 
prices didn't soar despite the crop losses. But farmers and rural communities were hurt. 
And an estimated 5.1 million acres of forest burned, including highly publicized fires in 
and around Yellowstone National Park.

What drought means
Information collected and analyzed by the National Climatic Data Center in 
Asheville, N.C., helps put the 1987-1989 drought, and other weather swings, in 
perspective. Reliable national records go back to 1895, just as the 1890s drought was 
ending. The map and graph from the Asheville Center on the previous page show how 
normal precipitation varies in different parts of the country and how precipitation has 
varied from year to year for the entire United States.
The map shows why the term drought is relative. If only 30 inches of rain fell during 
a year in South Florida, the region would be considered to be suffering from a serious 
drought; 30 inches is only a little more than half a year's normal rainfall. But 30 inches of 
precipitation just about anywhere in the West, except for the mountains of California and 
the Northwest, would be double the normal amount.
Drought is abnormal dryness for a particular region; exact definitions are 
complicated. Hydrologists have formulas that take into account such things as the amount 
of precipitation that fell during particular times and the amount of water in the soil, lakes 
and rivers. From this they determine whether a region is suffering a mild, severe or 
extreme drought, or whether it's abnormally wet.
The chart of annual rainfall on the previous page helps explain why the 1987-1989 
drought seemed so bad. It ended one of the wettest periods in 100 years. That period 
began in the late 1960s and included the two wettest years on record, 1973 and 1983.

Making sense of drought
Global weather patterns establish the conditions that dry out particular areas. Once a 
drought starts, it tends to feed upon itself until eventually a change in the global pattern 
ends it. While 30-day and 90-day forecasts have some success at predicting when large 
areas of the United States will be drier or wetter than average, they have little success at 
predicting when droughts will begin or end.
After the 1988 drought some researchers said patterns of sea surface temperatures in 
the tropical Pacific could have been a major trigger. Thunderstorms, which pump huge 
amounts of moisture and heat into the upper atmosphere, are most numerous over the 
warmest parts of tropical oceans. Heat carried high into the air by such thunderstorms can 
effect long-wave patterns of high-altitude winds. Shifts in locations of warmest water 
temperatures can change global patterns.
But, other researchers advanced strong arguments that other aspects of global 
weather patterns could have started the 1988 drought: the ocean temperature oat-tern then 
could have made it persist. The lesson is, don't expect to be able to forecast droughts 
based only on one aspect of weather patterns, such as ocean temperatures.
Another lesson that today's climatologists stress is that droughts are completely 
natural. You don't need anything unusual, such as greenhouse warming to account for 
them. The climate experts say governments ought to prepare for a 100-year drought 
because no matter what else the climate does, we'll face droughts in the future.

Managing floods and drought
People were building dams to manage foods and droughts before written history began. 
Efforts to forecast American floods go back to the 19th century beginnings of the 
National Weather Service. The United States undertook gigantic efforts to control floods 
and assure water supplies beginning in the 1930s. Huge water projects not only promised 
to bring rivers under control but also provided needed jobs during the Depression. The 
work speeded up after World War II and continued through the 1960s, until budget and 
environmental concerns began slowing the pace in the 1970s. Army Corps of Engineers 
figures show that at the end of 1932 the United States had 133 million acre feet of water 
stored behind dams. By 1944 that figure had increased to 279 million acre feet and by 
1969 to 753 million acre feet.
Even at the height of water project building, few experts seriously thought we would 
be able to build enough dams, levees and other structures to take care of all our potential 
water problems. People still need to forecast when and where floods are likely and how 
high the floods will be.
In the United States, hydrologists at 13 National Weather Service River Forecast 
Centers have the responsibility for forecasting floods. Some centers also make water-
supply forecasts. Their work is a kind of accounting, but instead of keeping track of 
money, they keep track of water. Their ledgers include how much water is in lakes, rivers 
and streams; how much rain has fallen recently and how much is expected; how much 
water melting snow should produce; and how much more water the soil can absorb. This 
watery bookkeeping enables them to forecast when floods are likely and how the water 
supply should hold out.
While the basic laws of physics determine how water acts, keeping track of it for 
even a relatively small area is dauntingly complicated. The amount of water evaporating 
or transpiring from plants changes with the wind, temperature and humidity. How much 
water soaks into the ground depends on the types of soil -which can vary across a region - 
and how wet the ground already is.
Even determining exactly how much rain is falling is harder than it might look. 
Rainfall is measured at weather stations, sometimes by volunteer observers, miles apart. 
The amount of rain failing at one place isn't a good guide to how much is falling just a 
mile away Weather radars give some idea of how heavy precipitation is, but they don't 
offer the detailed information hydrologists would like. Weather satellites offer little 
information about precipitation amounts.
When water is flowing down streams, keeping track of it gets tricky. Fast-moving 
flood waters can reshape stream bottoms, changing the amounts of water being carried 
and upsetting the hydrologist's calculations.
Flash floods, such as the Big Thompson disaster; create unique problems. Sometimes 
forecasters don't even know downpours are creating a flash flood until water is sweeping 
away houses. In a country as large as the United States, forecasters can never expect to 
detect every flood on every tiny stream.
Since the 1960s cities, towns, counties and other agencies have been installing flood 
warning systems. These consist of automated rain gauges or stream level gauges, 
sometimes both, connected to a central computer by radio or telephone. Relatively 
inexpensive personal computers can be programmed to monitor the reports from the 
gauges and sound an alarm when rainfall or water height reach dangerous levels.
The National Weather Service has made a large system in Tulsa, Okla., part of a 
prototype for the River Forecast Center of the future.
The Service's first Next Generation Weather Radar, NEXAD, is operating in 
Norman, Okla. It does a much better job than today's weather radars of measuring how 
much precipitation is falling. And it will help forecasters do a better job of predicting 
how much should fall in the next few hours. Data from NEXRAD and from Tulsa's 
rainfall and stream-level gauges is fed into a computer with information about soil 
moisture and other factors that determine how high the water will rise. With this in hand, 
forecasters can give better warnings with less danger of false alarms.
Faster, cheaper computers are beginning to change forecasting, too. Hydrologists at 
all 13 river forecast centers now do their calculations on a Weather Service mainframe 
computer in Suitland, Md. They type in the information, which goes to Suitland (and 
waits in line to run through the computer; for a half hour or so during busy times). The 
results are printed out at the river forecast centers. When something changes - say flood 
waters scour out a river's bottom, changing the water flow - the hydrologist has the 
Suitland computer recalculate the flood forecasts.
Now researchers are developing computer programs that can do the same job as the 
big Suitland computer on scientific workstations right at the river forecast centers. With 
their own computers, hydrologists will be able to work out more what-if scenarios and 
keep up with fast-changing conditions. The researchers envision one day giving 
hydrologists the capability to create graphics showing exactly which parts of a town will 
flood at a particular time.
Hydrologists know people are going to continue to live on flood plains and that the 
risks of floods are more likely to increase than decrease over the next several years. They 
also know droughts will continue to arrive from time to time. Their hope is to reduce the 
danger from floods and to help manage scarce water resources during droughts with 
better forecasts.

