10. SOLAR COLLECTOR ORIENTATION

*** Simplified - START
A solar heating system includes a solar collector.
It includes a heat storage. 
The solar collector captures solar radiation.
The heat is then stored in the heat storage.
The heat is moved from the heat storage to the house. 
-- Verified


A solar collector is like a large net.
Solar radiation hits the solar collector.
The solar collector gathers the solar radiation. 
-- Verified

A bucket is in a rain storm.
A solar collector is like the bucket.
The bucket collects rain; the solar collector collects solar radiation.
Collecting the rainwater requires angling the bucket towards the rain.
An open top of the bucket collects the rain. The top points towards the rain. 
If the rain falls straight down, the top lies flat.
If wind blows the rain, the top angles toward the rain. 
Similarly, collecting the solar radiation requires pointing the solar collector towards the sun.


A small shaft attaches to the solar collector.
The shaft has a shadow.
If the shadow is absent, then the solar collector is pointed toward the sun. 
The position of the sun changes, as the earth rotates. 
At dawn, the sun rises in the east. At dusk, the sun sets in the west. 
At noon, the sun is high in the sky.
In the united states, the sun does not move overhead.
A person faces south.
The sun rises left of him.
The sun moves through the sky.
The sun sets right of him. 
When the season changes, the position of the sun changes. 
In the winter, the sun travels at a low height.
In the winter, the sun travels at a high height.
***

oo -- You can get a better idea of the seasonal change of the sun's position by thinking in terms of shadows.
***
Because the sun travels at a high height in the summer, a shadow shrinks in the summer. 
The solar collector is for collecting solar radiation. 
However, the position of the sun changes, but the solar collector is stationary.
The solar collector faces the south to collect maximum solar radiation. 
***

oo -- Although there is a best direction to face a flat-plate collector, depending on the local latitude
(less tilt is needed in the south than the north), a tilted collector that generally faces the south performs adequately.

A solar heating system for a house angles toward a low position.
In the winter, the house needs heat.
In the winter, the sun moves to a low position.  
A solar heating system for a water heater angles toward a medium position.
In the winter, the water heater needs heat.
In the summer, the water heater needs heat.
The medium position is a compromise.

oo -- Solar swimming-pool heaters usually have the lowest tilt
angle. They need heat mostly in late spring, summer, and early
fall when the sun is highest in the sky.

A solar heating system for a pool angles toward a high position.
In the summer, the pool needs heat.
In the summer, the sun moves to a high position. 

