11. A SIMPLE SOLAR COLLECTOR

Now we need to learn what a solar collector is. The simplest
kind of flat-plate solar collector is just a black-painted metal
plate with a layer of insulation on the back side. It's painted
black because black best absorbs solar radiation, as we discussed
in Chapter 9. Since insulators prevent heat from conducting
through them, the insulation on the collector prevents
heat loss from the collector's back side.

If we faced the plate toward the sun at noon, it would
begin to get hot as it absorbed solar heat. How hot would it get?

We can learn a lot about a solar collector by thinking of it
in terms of a rainwater collector. Imagine that we are building a
device to collect rainwater. As a start, we get a big tray to catch
the rainwater, just as a solar collector "collects," or absorbs,
solar radiation. We attach a capped pipe to the tray so that all
the rain falling in the tray will flow down the pipe and be caught.

Suppose the only capped pipe we can find is one that
leaks. As the tray collects rain, the pipe fills; but rainwater flows
out through the leak. The deeper the water gets in the pipe, the
more water leaks out. At some point the depth gets so high that
the flow out the leak balances the incoming flow of rainwater.
Once this point is reached, the water gets no deeper. When the
incoming rainwater exactly balances the outgoing water loss
through the leak, the depth of water in the pipe is at its stagnation
depth.

Similarly, the stagnation temperature is how hot a collector
gets when the incoming solar radiation exactly balances the
heat losses that take place by radiation and convection. To
continue our analogy, the tray captures rainwater as the solar
collector captures solar radiation. Just as the water in the pipe
gets deeper and deeper, so does the temperature of the plate
become hotter and hotter. And just as more water flows out
through the leak as the water In the pipe gets deeper, so more
heat leaks off the front of the solar collector by radiation and
convection as the plate gets hotter. At some point the plate gets
so hot that the heat losses exactly balance the incoming solar
radiation. Once this point is reached, the plate gets no hotter.

;;;;;;;;;;;;;
A solar panel is like a rain collection system.
The solar panel collects solar radiation.
The rain collection system catches rainwater with a tray.
A pipe attaches to the tray.
However, the pipe has a leak.
The water leaks quickly, as the pipe fills.
The spillage balances the intake, when the pipe fills.
When the spillage balances the intake, the water stops rising.
When the spillage balances the intake, the water reaches a stagnation depth.
A stagnation temperature is like the stagnation depth.
A plate attaches to the solar panel.
When the heat's leakage balances the incoming solar radiation, the heat in the solar panel reaches a stagnation temperature.


;;;;

The stagnation temperature of a surface-the hottest a
surface exposed to the sun can get-depends on how much
solar radiation is absorbed. The amount of radiation absorbed
depends on the color of the surface, the angle of the sun's rays
striking the collector, and how much sunlight actually strikes it.
The best setup to use to absorb solar radiation is the one just
described: a black surface squarely facing the sun on a clear
day. A light-colored surface, a surface not directly facing the
sun, or an overcast day will reduce the amount of solar radiation
absorbed by the surface.
--------------------------------------------------
;;;How will less absorbed radiation affect the stagnation
;;;temperature? Let's use the analogy of the rainwater collector
;;;again to understand what happens.
A solar collector is like a rain collection system.

;;;Suppose a light rain is falling on the tray rather than a heavy rain-that's comparable to
;;;less solar radiation striking the solar collector.

A light rain falls on the rain collection system's tray.
Little solar radiation hits the solar collector.
The light rain is like the little solar radiation.

;;;With less rain falling, the tray collects less and the incoming rainwater flow is less.
Because the light rain falls, the tray collects little water.
Because the light rain falls, the intake is reduced.

;;;Recall that when we discussed house heating, we found
;;;that a lower water depth in the bucket resulted in less flow out
;;;through the bucket's holes: high depths are associated with
;;;high leakage; low depths, with low leakage.
If the water's depth falls, the spillage is reduced.
If the depth of the water rises, the spillage is increased.


;;;Thus, if less rainwater is flowing down the pipe, the depth needn't be as high to
;;;force all of the incoming water out through the holes.
;;;The water
;;;in the pipe wouldn't be as deep before the flow out through the
;;;holes balanced the incoming rainwater flow. We can conclude
;;;from this that if the incoming rainwater is less, the stagnation
;;;depth also goes down.
If the intake is reduced, a low depth pushes the intake from the pipe.
If the intake is reduced, the stagnation depth is reduced.
If the intake is reduced, the low depth balances the intake.


;;;How can we apply this analogy to the solar collector? We
;;;would expect the stagnation temperature to be less if the
;;;absorbed solar radiation was less (since the stagnation depth
;;;was less when the rainfall was less).
Similarly, if the solar radiation is reduced, the stagnation temperature falls.

-----------------------------------
When less solar radiation is
absorbed, our simple solar collector starts to get hot. It will lose
more and more heat as it gets hotter. Eventually the heat losses
will equal the amount of solar radiation absorbed. But since the
solar radiation absorbed is less, the collector won't be very hot
when the losses balance the absorbed radiation.

How hot our simple solar collector gets depends on how
much solar radiation it absorbs. We've gotten the plate hot, but
we haven't gotten any heat from it yet-the plate may be collecting
solar radiation, but it's not doing us any good. You can't pay
your heating bills with a hot black plate. We want heat from a
solar heating system, not temperature.
