The Task of a Circulation

Imagine a vast collection of ordinary suburban houses-quite a vast
collection since we intend them as analogs of our 100,000,000,000,000
(100 trillion) cells. Each has a certain functional autonomy, being
equipped with the full facilities for storing, preparing, and eating
food; for dressing and sleeping; for (as no biologist can forget)
conceiving; and so forth. The autonomy, however, has its limits,
transcended by the need for delivery of water, food, and energy, and
for disposal of refuse and sewage. The biological analogs of these
inputs and outputs are what a circulatory system manages-clearly
crucial and just as clearly the most pedestrian of matters. Again 1
emphasize that for neither the houses' nor the cells are they dramatic
matters of active concern. In both cases requiring attention is the
sort of pathological situation one prefers to avoid. For either,
functions such as communication are more obtrusive-for a house both
the wired and wireless sorts of communication, for a cell both neural
and endocrine signals.  Signals most often indicate changes, changes
commonly demand responses, and we've learned (in several senses) to
pay attention. Nonetheless, while perhaps more obvious and insistent,
these communicative systems are only intermittently critical; their
failure is less certainly and immediately fatal.

A circulatory system, then, moves material around within an animal. A
carrier, blood, goes around and around, while other items make less
monotonously repetitive circuits. Just what items are moved around
varies a bit, both from time to time and from organism to organism.
The system turns out to be more multifunctional than at first it
appears. For one thing, the contrast I made with communicative systems
involves no single, sharp distinction - hormones are commonly
blood-borne, and they are nothing more than messages that regulate and
synchronize the activities of otherwise fairly autonomous cells. For
another, heat is transferred through movement of blood - it's a
byproduct of all of our metabolic chemistry and is eventually dumped
off upon our surroundings. While heat is produced throughout a body,
it must be lost across a surface. Thus it needs transporting from core
to periphery; or, at least under some circumstances, one's core will
get intolerably warm. Under other conditions we find it useful to heat
our appendages with what we make in the middle: cold fingers and toes
are as likely to reflect poor circulation as to indicate insufficient
heat production. Circulatory systems are even used to transmit
force. The obvious case is erectile tissue: without heart and
bloodstream we'd have no way to pump up our kind of penis-muscles have
no role in the job. A less obvious but more widespread use of the
hydraulic force of a pressurized bloodstream is in pushing blood
though the filtration stage of kidneys.

By far the most demanding circulatory task for creatures like us is
the transport of dissolved gases. In particular, oxygen is carried
from the lungs elsewhere, and carbon dioxide, the main product of
using that oxygen, is returned to the lungs. Of the two, oxygen
transport is probably the trickier, simply because less oxygen
normally dissolves in watery liquids. (Oxygenated rather than
carbonated beer would be a lot less bubbly.) All the numerous tasks
beside transporting oxygen and carbon dioxide could be done with a
simpler and more sluggish system. I defend this assertion that gas
transport is the most demanding function with a typical bit of
biologist's logic-through comparison with a circulatory system that
proves completely adequate for organisms that don't use it to
transport dissolved gases. As it happens, insects have a separate
system of pipes that carry oxygen and carbon dioxide to and from
individual cells in (mainly) gaseous form. They do have hearts and
some blood vessels, but their circulatory systems work at rather low
pressures and flow speeds. To anticipate any argument that insects are
primitive or inactive let me point out that many of them fly, and
flying is about the most energy-intensive activity known either in
nature or in human-designed transportation systems.

Among animals, we birds and mammals are unusual (but not quite unique)
in maintaining rather warm and fairly constant internal
temperatures. By insisting on having hot innards, we're committed to a
rapid pace of life. We eat copiously and often, and we release heat
by combining stored fat and carbohydrate with oxygen. Our internal
fires burn intensely, and not just as analogy or metaphor. When the
fat's in the fire it uses the same amount of oxygen and releases the
same amount of energy as when it's burned under much more controlled
conditions within our cells. A sedentary person consumes about 70
kilocalories an hour, which translates into a heat production of 80
watts. By contrast, a sedentary alligator of the same weight but with
a body at ambient temperature consumes only about 17 kilocalories an
hour, corresponding to 20 watts, about four times less. Our cells need
proportionately more oxygen and produce more carbon dioxide than do
those of the alligator; our circulatory systems have to bring the
first to the cells from our lungs and take the second back to the
lungs. Still, as we'll see, without circulatory systems even
alligators are quite out of the question.

Alligators and insects are certainly not everyone's favorite
creatures. But notice the heuristic utility of the perspective they
permit, even if one's concern is entirely with humans. I've used the
comparison with insects to argue that gas transport is the most
demanding circulatory function and with alligators to suggest that the
demand is especially great because we're warm-blooded animals. Thus I
justify what might otherwise seem a disproportionate emphasis on a
single function in a peculiar subset of vertebrates in all that will
follow.

Simple Circuitry

At this point, we should take a look at a specific circulatory system,
perhaps starting with a picture of our own, but a formidable problem
immediately arises-we can't draw a decently informative illustration
of our circulatory system on an ordinary printed page. For one thing,
the system is three-dimensional; worse yet, it's made of parts
awkwardly diverse in size. If capillaries, 8 micrometers (a
three-thousandth of an inch) in diameter, are shown, then the heart
(less than 5 inches high and slightly more than 3 inches wide) won't
fit on the page. So it takes considerable imagination to visualize the
thing. In fact, there's a more general problem. We biologists are all
too prone, I think, to submerge ourselves and everyone else in
anatomical and terminological detail. It's better if we defer that
plunge at least briefly. Beginning with an overall view of function
will greatly reduce the burden imposed by a lot of names and places.

For now, describing function can be helped considerably by using
analogies and by beginning with less complex biological cases. So
we'll go back to our suburban houses, now using them to draw parallels
between household heating systems and the oxygen distribution systems
of animals. In particular, we'll focus on those systems in which heat
is produced centrally and then distributed as hot air or hot water to
the various rooms. The components of such a system are, first, a set
of pipes for transporting the hot air or water. There must also be
some pump for either circulating medium. Finally, two different kinds
of exchangers are needed. In one, heat is acquired by the medium-we
call it a furnace; in the other heat is transferred to the living
quarters- it may be a set of radiators or just a trivial mixing
arrangement for hot air coming out of some ports. So-pipes, pump, and
two kinds of exchangers. These are precisely, and for just the same
reasons, the indispensable components of circulatory systems. All
others are really just fillips and flourishes. At this point we might
draw a picture of a heating system on one side of a page and at least
a crude one of a circulatory system on the other, but the very
different appearance and location of the parts of each would get in
the way of recognizing any underlying similarity in their
interconnections. A better way is to borrow the engineering practice
of using purely functional diagrams.The hot air heating system (Figure
1.1a) needs a full set of distributional ducts, but it manages to work
without much in the way of return pipes. A house has a fixed volume,
and air is pretty nearly incompressible at any speeds of flow with
which we might comfortably coexist. So blow air from furnace to
periphery, and the air will return to the furnace of its own accord. A
little help may be needed-my house has a few return ducts from the
more remote bedrooms, and it ought to have another to keep the living
room (on the other end) properly heated. (And animals arranged this
way come equipped with a quite a few odd ducts and auxiliary pumps to
handle their various anatomical tortuosities.)

The circulatory system of a snail or spider (Figure 1.1b) is arranged
in much the same way as the hot air heating system. Blood is pumped by
a heart; it exchanges dissolved gases with the environment through a
set of gills (most snails) or sheet-like lungs (most spiders); and it
moves heartward again without benefit of very specific piping. In this
heartward oozing through the rest of the body, the second exchange
takes place, the one by which tissues are provided with dissolved
oxygen and dump their dissolved carbon dioxide. In the biology
textbooks of my youth such a system, termed an open circulatory
system, was derided as primitive on account of its lack of discrete
return pipes. That's probably an unnecessary and inappropriate bit of
vertebrate or mammalian hubris. Spiders, lobsters, and the rest of the
great phylum of arthropods (which includes the insects, a distinct
group from the spiders) have inextensible outer shells rather than our
more flexible skin. Furthermore, water and all bloods are even less
easily compressed than air. If blood is pumped to the front, it simply
has to find its way rearward since it can go nowhere else. Discrete
pipes to carry blood rearward would be just so much needless baggage,
wasting space better	      invested in equipment closer to proper
reproductive imperatives-in short, to guts and gonads. Similarly,
pumping blood outward to the tips of legs must, if no leaks develop,
force it back inward automatically.

By contrast, in a recirculating hot water system (a fine, if initially
expensive way to heat a house), a pump pushes water first through the
heat exchanger of the furnace and then through the heat exchangers
more commonly referred to as radiators (Figure 1.2a). A return pipe
from each radiator carries the somewhat cooler water back to the pump
and furnace. Radiators are necessary, of course, because our houses
are filled with air rather than water. The circulatory system of a
fish (Figure 1.2b) is closely analogous. A heart pumps blood forward;
blood then passes through the gills where it acquires oxygen and
disposes of carbon dioxide. After that it goes by way of arteries to
the other exchanger, the network of capillaries elsewhere in the body;
it finally returns through veins to the heart again.

 The Bird-and-Mammal Scheme

What of ourselves, neither spiders nor fish, but proper mammals? We
use a modification of the piscine scheme; and I mean modification in
both of the biologist's senses - historical and functional. That is,
our structures represent the end of a long history of modification of
what some early fishes invented about 400 million years ago. Our
mammalian version probably reached very much its present form by a
still ancient 200 million years ago. At least that's the well-accepted
inference, since our circulatory equipment operates in a way quite
similar to that of modern fishes and most likely of ancient fishes as
well. A little educated guessing is, of course, involved - circulatory
systems don't leave nice, accommodating fossils as do bones. It would,
however, be quite astonishing if ancient fish did things very much
differently from their extant descendants. The evolutionary history
isn't irrelevant. If you set out to design, de novo, a mammalian
circulation, you might do better to arrange it a bit differently from
what we in fact have. If you're limited to modifying pre-existing
anatomy, then you're likely to end up with certain quirks and
jury-rigged arrangements.

It's worth noting that, while descent with modification is evolution's
way, existing structures are not uncommonly pressed into service for
new functions. The main buoyancy devices of fish, swim bladders, come
from the same antecedent structures as do our lungs. The tiny bones in
our middle ears come from the same antecedents as some associated with
the gills of fish, bones whose equivalents see service in the jaws of
reptiles and amphibians.4 By contrast, these circulatory systems we're
talking about not only come from the same ancestral structures, but
also retain the same essential function. Vertebrates have been pretty
conservative, evolutionarily, and circulatory systems seem to have
especially strong traditions. According to the best evidence, birds
and mammals represent separate offshoots of the reptilian stock,
lineages that branched from different reptilian forebears at different
times. Birds and mammals nonetheless hit upon the same basic
alterations of the reptilian circulation. Perhaps that isn't too
surprising - the changes are simple, logical, and effective.

Figure 1.3 is a circuit diagram of the circulatory arrangements of
mammals and birds. Two really major alterations are evident. Gills,
suitable for extracting oxygen from water, have been replaced,
functionally, by lungs that extract oxygen from air. Gills haven't, it
turns out, been modified into lungs. Curiously, the components of the
gills have been lost or put to other purposes, and lungs have
developed separately as outpocketings of the esophagus-the
outpocketings that in fish we noted serve as gas-filled swim
bladders. The other alteration is the addition of a second heart. A
fish pushes blood through two exchangers with one heart; a bird or
mammal has an additional pump between the exchangers. Our blood goes
from one heart to the lungs to the second heart to the rest of the
body and then back to the first heart.

At once something distinctly queer about the arrangement jumps
out. Two hearts located in quite different places hardly constitute a
proper vision for St. Valentine, and they certainly don't correspond
to our common notion of what we have inside. No mistake-in a
func-tional sense each of us does have two hearts, but they just
happen to be combined into one muscular organ, and they can beat only
in syn-chrony. The anatomical combination obscures the functional
distinc-tion. That combination, though, is probably one of those
accidents of "descent with modification," as Mr. Darwin put it, one of
those odd quirks evolution leaves in its wake. Anyhow, half-heart one
(right side) pushes blood through the lungs, and it's a little
smaller; half-heart two (left side) is larger and pushes blood through
the rest of the body.

The scheme makes good sense. As we'll see later, these pumps really
expend energy pushing blood through the tiniest vessels, mainly
capillaries, of both the lungs and all the other organs. In a plumbing
system, loss of energy is associated with a decrease in pressure,
which will be discussed further in Chapter 4. Therefore the pressure
imparted by the pump to the blood decreases substantially as blood
passes through a set of tiny vessels. Going through two sets in
sequence (at a given speed) would require that the blood start with
twice the pressure needed to push through one set. Among other
difficulties, the pipes leaving the pump would need additional
reinforcement or would be more suscep-tible to blow-outs (ruptured
aneurysms, in the trade). Solution-a booster pump between first and
second sets of tiny vessels.

(Again, to dismiss the single-hearted fishes as primitive would be an
indefensibly anthropocentric attitude. Fish do quite nicely, thank
you- they're the most numerous of all vertebrates. They, like
alligators, just don't ordinarily go in for our profligate rates of
oxygen use. Fish blood circulates more slowly than does our own, and
the pressures involved are correspondingly lower.)

Which pump we call the main one and which the booster is more or less
arbitrary. Our "lung" half-heart (right side) is the more imme-diate
functional descendent of the sole piscine pump, so we might best
regard the larger "body" half-heart (left side) as the secondary
booster. Curiously, the creatures that stand between fish and us in an
evolutionary sense, amphibians and reptiles, have various sorts of
in-between arrangements about which more will be said later. The full,
deluxe, duplex deal graces only birds and mammals. Odder still, these
nearly identical hearts clearly represent two quite independently
evolved modifications of the hearts of reptilian forebears. Possession
of these fancy double hearts is surely related to the fact that only
birds and mammals routinely maintain body temperatures well above
those of their surroundings.

A few items of terminology are now unavoidable. (I only disparage
terms as jargon when I don't need them.) Our mammalian system consists
of two pumps, collectively called the heart, and three main kinds of
pipes. Arteries have thick walls that withstand the full pressure
generated by the squeeze of the heart; they carry blood away from the
heart. (The largest artery, the one leading out to the body from the
heart is called the aorta.) Capillaries are tiny pipes with very thin
walls that are supplied with blood by the arteries. Whether in the
lungs or elsewhere, they're the sites at which material is exchanged
between blood and the tissues of the body. Veins have thinner walls
and much lower internal pressures than the arteries. They drain the
capillaries and return blood to the heart. Each side of the heart
consists of two pumping chambers serially arranged, an atrium
(sometimes called an "auricle" on account of being a bit ear-shaped)
and a ventricle. Thus the heart has four chambers in all. The system
has other components, but these are the main ones.

What flows through the system is blood, consisting of a watery liquid
(plasma) in which are suspended a variety of small entities-mainly
cells of varying sorts and sizes. In addition, blood carries dissolved
gases, salts, hormones, droplets of fat, energy-yielding molecules
such as glucose, waste materials such as urea, and a wide variety of
proteins involved in such functions as clotting and inflammatory
responses. These materials enter and leave the blood as it passes
through the capillaries of the various organs.

Quantifying Things

Let's add some numbers to all the words, using the human circulation
as source of data-adult humans of average size. At least in pushing
blood around humans are not especially unusual mammals, lots of human
data are available, and both reader and writer are without the
slightest doubt quite human While most of these numbers will come up
again later, it will be handy to have them in one place.

Blood volume: 5.2 liters (5.5 quarts) in the body, about 5 percent of
which is in the heart. Being relieved of a pint (half a quart or about
half a liter) is no big deal if you're in normal health-it's less than
10 percent of your stock. Lady Macbeth, you may remember, found this
large volume noteworthy.

Output, left ventricle: 5 liters (5.3 quarts) per minute for a person
at rest, and about six times higher in strenuous exercise. The output
of the right ventricle is, of course, precisely the same. When at
rest, the whole blood volume of the body passes through the left heart
every minute, or a bit of blood takes about a minute to make the
complete circulatory circuit. During heavy exercise, the circuit takes
only about 10 seconds.

Stroke volume and heartbeat rate: The 5 liters per minute is the
product of about 70 milliliters (2.5 ounces) per stroke times about 72
strokes per minute.

Fraction of blood occupied by cells ("hematocrit"): from 37 to 52
percent. Most of this volume is occupied by the so-called red blood
cells, of which you have 5 million per cubic millimeter or about
25,000,000,000,000 (25 trillion) in all.

Speed of flow leaving heart: 0.3 meters (about 1 foot) per second,
resting. In maximal aerobic exercise in a well-conditioned person it
rises to about 2 meters per second (about 6 feet per second or 2.5
miles per hour); a leisurely walking pace.

Speed of flow in capillarieso 0 4 millimeters per second at rest or
about 800 times lower than the speed at the aorta, the exit from the
heart. That's 50 days per mile, in our perceptual world exceedingly
slow.

Overall area of capillary wall: 8000 square meters or all of 2
acres. That's the surface across which material can move between the
cir-culatory system and the surrounding tissues.

Combined length of pipes: 100,000 kilometers (60,000 miles)-more than
twice around the earth at the equator.

Heart weight: About 0.3 kilograms (11 ounces) or about half a percent
of body weight. A heart isn't an especially large organ.

Power output of heart: 1.3 watts at rest, about 8 watts during
exercise. The latter is about 30 times less than the power per unit
weight of a good internal combustion piston engine of almost any size.

Power consumption of heart: At rest, this is 13 watts, or about a
sixth of the body's resting power consumption of 80 watts, as
mentioned earlier. 1.3 (earlier) divided by 13 is, of course, 10
percent. Thus about 10 percent of the fuel (fat, etc.) consumed by the
heart appears as useful, blood propelling, output.

And Questions Left Hanging

I've now sketched the main features of the circulatory systems that
will occupy the forthcoming pages. All the rest, though, isn't just
detail. The present description is about as bald as its author, only a
little more user-friendly than a textbook, and without all of my
favorite devices. Worst of all, it conveys little sense of the logic
and elegance of the various features of these systems. To push one of
my long-standing polemical themes, such features do not unfold from an
evermore detailed study of the organisms, but from consideration of
just what problems these circulatory systems are up against. It sounds
backward - to imagine problems and then to investigate what animals have
done about them-but the approach turns out to be useful both as a way
to do science and as a way to talk about functional systems. The
following, then, are a few of the problems.

Liquids are, for all practical purposes, incompressible. If, in
contracting, the heart's chambers get smaller, then blood pushed out
must turn up as an increased volume elsewhere. One attractive fix,
beating left and right hearts alternately, isn't used, perhaps because
of the fact that the two ventricles are squeezed by the same muscle
(-two hearts beat as one, even without romantic hyperbole). Are there
functional consequences of this periodic variation of the volume of
the rest of the system?

If you blow into a cylindrical balloon it inevitably expands almost to
full inflation in one portion before inflating anywhere else. The
initial bulge is what we'd call an aneurysm. When you have one in any
part of your circulatory system you're in mortal danger since
aneurysms, like balloons, are prone to burst. Blood vessels don't
ordinarily develop aneurysms, however, and one wonders why. They
certainly have stretchy walls-the situation described in the previous
item absolutely demands stretchy walls.

Your circulatory system is a serial arrangement of pipes and pumps (as
just described). Thus in any period of time as much blood must pass
through the lungs as passes through the capillaries of every other
organ in the body combined. Lungs are only a tiny fraction (about 1
percent) of the body's mass-are they really as bloody as this
requirement seems to imply?

A heart is mainly muscle; contraction of this muscle reduces the
volume of the chambers inside. So blood gets squeezed out. Valves
ensure that it always get squeezed out in one direction, and each
valve dutifully opens and shuts once in each stroke. How can they
perform their mechanical task when they have no nerve supply to ensure
that they open and shut at the right points in the stroke

Blood flows rapidly in the arteries but much more slowly in the
capillaries, allowing time for diffusion of dissolved materials across
the capillary walls. But the blood speeds up again as it gets intc the
veins and is finally heartward bound. Where's the pump that so speeds
venous blood on its return journey?

The hearts of large animals beat less frequently than do those of
small animals. Large animals live longer, usually, than do small
ones. If you multiply the number of heartbeats per minute by the
number of minutes per lifetime you get a figure for heartbeats per
lifetime, certainly an odd datum. What makes the datum really strange
is that its value, about 1 billion, is nearly the same for most
mammals. Anything constant amid the great diversity of or. ganisms
catches our attention-but what functional significance if any, might
attach to heartbeats per lifetime?

It's easy to go on, but you surely get the idea. Most of a book lie;
ahead, and with some heartwrenching cardiac pun (your choice) we press
on.

