Something you never see may have saved your life today when you were about to cross the street. What was it? Each year people spend a great deal of money to fill their rooms with something they never see. What is it? If you are in one room, what helps you know who is talking in the next room? You have most likely guessed that the answer to all the questions is SOUND. Sound is a big part of your life. But what causes it to happen? What makes sound? And how does sound reach you? How does it travel? The starting point of all sound is something that vibrates, or moves back and forth. When you pound a drum or ring a bell, you are making things vibrate. Vibrating objects make sound. When you talk, your tongue, vocal cords, and lips move back and forth. They set the air into motion. They even make your head rattle and shake. To prove it, simply place your hand firmly on top of your head. Now talk loudly or sing. You will feel your head shake. 

When you talk on the phone, the sound of your voice is not really carried through the wires. What happens is this: When you talk, you set the air into motion. This moving air hits a small piece of metal inside the mouthpiece of the phone and makes it vibrate. The motion of this metal controls	the amount of current that goes through the wires. The changing flow of current makes another piece of metal in the receiving end of the phone vibrate. It moves back and forth the same way the first metal plate did. The vibrations are heard by your listener.
How	does sound travel?	Sound travels in waves of moving air. We cannot see sound waves, but they act much like water waves. After a rain you may have seen puddles on the ground. Perhaps you threw a small rock or pebble into the puddle. You saw ripples or waves form in tiny circles around the spot where the pebble hit the water. They then spread out into ever larger circles until the waves reached the edge of the puddle.
Sound waves travel in much the same way through the air. Here is something you can do to show how sound waves travel. Get five or six hard-covered books about the same size. Stand them up in a row so that the front cover of one book is close to the back cover of the book ahead of it.
Give a push to the first book. This push will travel from the first book to the next one. It will go down the line until the last book falls. As you will see, you do not push the last book yourself. You push only the first book. But this push is handed on from the first book down to the last one.
It is the same kind of push that makes sound waves travel through the air. The push goes from one speck of air (called a molecule) to the next one. It continues until, finally, the air next to your eardrum is pushed into motion. This moving air makes your eardrum vibrate. And you hear something!




























ibrations make sound	The vibra-tions make the air move in waves. The wave finally reaches the eardrum of the listener. Because of these simple facts, you hear many things, such as the voice of a friend, the song of a bird, and the whisper of the wind.
