A man owns a mine.
A gold mine contains poor ore.
Mining gold requires digging much.
Processing the ore requires expensive mining equipment.
Acquiring the gold requires processing the ore.
The gold is free, but acquiring the gold is expensive.
Acquiring the gold benefits the man, if the gold possesses great value.
Acquiring the gold benefits the man, if the mining equipment possesses only a little value.
Acquiring the gold harms the man, if the gold possesses little value.
Acquiring the gold harms the man, if the mining equipment possesses great value.
A gold mine in Utah closes, if the gold possesses only a little value.
The gold mine opens, if the gold possesses great value.
Solar radiation is like the poor ore.
Acquiring solar energy requires collecting the solar radiation.
Using the solar energy requires transforming the solar energy into electricity.
The solar collector collects the solar energy.
Similarly, the mining equipment collects the gold.
The solar collector is expensive.
The solar collector is more expensive than the solar radiation.
The solar heating system saves cash, if electricity possesses great value.
The solar heating system wastes cash, if electricity possesses only a little value. 
The gold mine in Utah closes, if the gold mine wastes cash.
A solar heating system in Florida closes, if electricity possesses only a little value.
Because gold now possesses great value, the gold mine in Utah makes cash.
Similarly, electricity now possesses great value.
Because the electricity possesses great value, the solar heating system saves cash. 
The solar collector collects sunlight. It is like mining equipment.
Mining poor ore wastes cash, if the mining equipment possesses great value.
The mining equipment possesses longevity, if the mining equipment possesses simplicity. 
Similarly, if the solar collector possesses simplicity, the solar collector possesses longevity. 
Because the flat plate system possesses simplicity, the flat plate system saves cash.