
What is the mass of earth's population?

How much energy is produced by fully converting a teaspoonful of water to energy?

How much water can be brought to boil using X amount of energy?

How much does the Thames River heat up in going over the Fanshawe Dam?

How much energy does a horse consume in its lifetime?

What is the weight of the air over Lake Superior?

How many joules of chemical energy are there in one litre of gasoline?

How many bricks are there in London?

How many automobiles are scrapped in North America per year?

How many air molecules in an automobile tire?

How many photons/sec are emitted by a 100 watt light bulb?

How long would it take a paramecium to swim from London to Toronto?

How many cells are there in the human body?

How many oxygen molecules enter your lungs on each inhalation?

How many kilometres of D.N.A. are there in the cells of one human body?

How many dollars would each person on this planet possess if there were a mole of dollars to distribute?

How many meters would a ground state electron in a hydrogen atom be from its nucleus if the nucleus of the hydrogen atom was blown up to the size of a baseball?

How many water molecules are there in a totally filled olympic size swimming pool?

To what height could loose leaf paper be stacked if you possessed Avogadro's number of sheets?

How many years would it take for McDonalds to sell a mole of their hamburgers?

How many atoms of iron are there in a sewing needle?

How many litres of gasoline are used in Chicago in a year?

How many electrons could a fully charged 12 volt car battery release before it was completely discharged?

How many gas molecules are there in the earth's atmosphere? 

How many sodium ions are in one tablespoon of salt?

What volume of hydrogen gas measured at S.T.P. could be produced by the electrolysis of all the water in Lake Erie?

When the island of Krakatoa was destroyed by a volcanic eruption, the sound waves could be detected world wide. How long would it take for such a wave to travel around the earth and come back to Krakatoa?

If fighter pilots experience too high gee forces in a turn they black out. What is the minimum safe vertical turning circle for a plane travelling at the speed of sound?

Estimate the mass of lead deposited each year in London due to emissions from automobiles. Each litre of gas contains about 2 grams of lead.

How many piano tuners are there in Toronto?

How many electrons are there in the electron beam between the cathode of your T.V. set and the screen?

What is the thickness of a sheet of paper in wavelengths of visible light?

Calculate the gravitational attraction between a man and a woman as they stand talking to each other.

There are approximately 1.5 x 10^9 cubic kilometres of ocean. If the water was to evaporate, what mass of minerals would remain behind?

People crowd into London until all available open space within the city limits is covered with standing people. How many people would there be?
