21. PASSIVE SOLAR: THE DIODE FUNCTION

The diode function-letting solar heat flow in but not letting it
flow out easily-can be added to direct-gain solar heating by
movable insulation. To do this, insulation is moved in front of
the glass south wall at night. One passive heating system,
called Drum-wall, has a thick insulating wall that hinges at the
ground. At night it is pulled up against the glass to keep heat
from leaking out; during the day it is lowered to let solar heat
through the glass wall. The system is called Drum-wall because
just inside the glass wall is a stack of water-filled drums used
for heat storage.

The south wall of a house isn't the only place where the
diode function can be utilized. Another passive design called
Skytherm uses the roof of a flat house both as a solar collector
and as a storage medium. The system stores heat in water-filled
plastic bags, similar in construction to water beds. The bags
rest on a metal roof so heat from them can be conducted
through the roof and then radiated to the living space below. The
diode function works by means of large slabs of insulation that
slide on tracks over the bags, insulating them at night. The
black-colored bags absorb solar heat during the day when the
insulating slabs are moved aside by a device similar to a garage-door
opener.

Movable insulation doesn't always mean moving big
slabs of insulation. In Beadwall, another type of passive solar
heating, the diode function works by moving Styrofoam beads.
A fan blows the beads into the space between two glass layers
on the south wall of a house. When in place, they provide excellent
insulation against heat loss through the glass. When the
beads are removed by a suction fan, solar radiation goes
through both glass layers and heats the storage within. Sometimes
large vertical fiberglass or metal tubes filled with water
store heat in a Beadwall system.

Not all passive heating systems use movable insulation
to achieve the diode function. A system called the Trombé wall
(named after its French inventor) uses quite a different technique. 
A masonry wall is built just inside the glass south-wall of
a direct-gain house leaving a gap a few inches wide between the
masonry and the glass. This gap is connected to the living space
by holes in the masonry near the floor and the ceiling.

Air in the gap between the glass and masonry is heated
by convection from the black-painted wall. The lighter, heated
air tends to rise, just as hot air in a chimney rises. It flows out
through the upper holes and is replaced by cool air flowing in
through the bottom holes. This cool air is, in turn, heated by the
wall and flows out through the top holes. Of course, the cool air
flowing in the bottom is the previously heated air which has
given up its heat to the room. The process of circulation based
solely on heating and cooling is called thermosyphon circulation.
Instead of a fan blowing air from the solar collector into the
living space, the air moves there by itself. Heat moves by transport
heat flow, In a process very similar to natural convection.

Heat can be lost by thermosyphon action at night. Air in
the gap cooled by the cold night air tends to sink and flow out
through the bottom holes and is replaced by warm air flowing in
through the top holes. To prevent reverse thermosyphon, as it is
called, the top holes are loosely covered by a thin plastic flap.
The flap operates like the one in the check valve of our rainwater
analogy-it lets warm air flow into the house during the day but
won't let it flow back out again at night.

The passive heating systems we've just discussed illustrate
the diode function. They show how a direct-gain system
can be modified to reduce nighttime heat loss. But that is not to
say these same systems can't perform a control function as
well. Next, we'll see how these and other passive systems can
control solar heat delivered to the living space.

