15. NIGHTTIME HEAT LOSS

The solar collector has captured the sun's heat during the day,
and the captured heat has been pumped to storage. But what
happens when the sun goes down or the sky clouds over? Again,
we'll use our rainwater apparatus to understand what happens.

Suppose the rainwater tank is nearly filled and the rain
stops. What will happen? With no rain falling on the rain collecting
tray, no rainwater flows down the pipe. But water can
still flow into the pipe from the tank through the tube that
connects the two. The water depth in the pipe, then, will have
almost the same depth as the water in the tank, since water can
flow easily between them. However, when there is water in the
pipe it leaks out-the higher the depth, the more the leakage.
The net result is that stored water can flow out of storage and
into the pipe and then flow out the leak. All the carefully collected
rainwater leaks away as soon as the rain stops.

To prevent loss from the tank when the rain stops, we can
put a check valve in the tube connecting the pipe and the tank. A
check valve is a device that blocks the flow of water in one 
direction but allows it to flow in the other direction. Check valves are
common devices to let a liquid flow in only one direction; in
fact, your own heart has several such valves to keep your blood
flowing in the right direction.

With a check valve inserted in the tube between the pipe
and the tank, rainwater can flow easily from the pipe to the tank
when the tray is catching rainwater. But when the rain stops, the
check valve prevents any stored water from flowing back out the
tank and into the pipe where it leaks away.

The same process can occur in a solar heating system.
Heat in the heat storage tank can be lost after the sun goes
down. When solar radiation is not being absorbed by the collector 
plate, the water loses heat as it passes through the collector;
it does not gain heat. Hot water pumped from the storage tank to
the collector is hotter than the outdoors temperature, so heat
flows by radiation and convection to the outdoors.

As stored water from the rainwater collector tank leaks
away when the rain stops, so stored heat leaks from the solar
collector tank when the sun is not out. In the rainwater system,
we can use a check valve to prevent rainwater from flowing back
from the tank to the pipe. The check valve lets rainwater into the
tank, not out of it where it can leak away. In our solar heating
system, the same effect can be achieved simply by stopping the
pump whenever the sun isn't shining. Just as the check valve
senses when the tank depth is greater than the pipe depth-in
other words, when rainwater is leaving the tank-temperature
sensors detect when the heat storage tank is hotter than the
collector-when heat is leaving storage-and they control the
pump. If the storage tank is hotter than the collector, the pump
is shut off; if the collector is hotter than the storage tank, the
pump is turned on.



