4. CONDUCTION AND CONVECTION

First, let's look at conduction. Two kinds of materials are
involved in conduction heat flow: conductors and insulators.
Conductors let heat flow through them easily, but insulators
prevent heat from flowing. Most metals, such as silver, copper,
aluminum, and steel, are good conductors of heat. Insulators,
on the other hand, are usually lightweight materials, such as
straw, fiberglass batting, or plastic foam. Other materials, such
as glass, concrete, rubber, wood, and dirt, are neither good conductors
nor good insulators; heat passes through them more
easily than through an insulator but not as easily as through a
conductor.

Conduction heat flow depends on several factors. We've
already learned that it depends in the first place on temperature
difference (as does all heat flow) as well as on the kind of
material involved (whether conductor or insulator). It also
depends on the area of the heat-flow path. In the example of the
silver spoon, the heat-flow path is from the coffee to the
spoon's end.

To understand how the heat-flow path changes the
conduction heat flow through an object, suppose we try to melt
an ice cube using a cup of hot coffee. If we put one end of a
silver bar into a coffee cup and hold an ice cube against the
other end, the ice will hold one end of the bar at a fixed temperature
(since ice melts at 32º F); how quickly the ice melts will
measure how much heat is flowing through the bar from the
coffee. A thick bar will melt the ice more quickly than a thin one
because a thick bar lets more heat from the coffee through-the
heat-flow path of the thicker bar has a bigger area.

The length of the heat-flow path is also important. Less
heat flows through a longer bar than through a shorter bar
because the length of the heat-flow path impedes the flow of heat.

Four factors affect how much heat will flow through a
material by conduction: temperature difference, material, area,
and the length of the heat-flow path. By analogy to water flow,
think of a pipe attached to the bottom of a big tank.

Four factors also affect how much fluid will flow through
the pipe. As shown in the following figure, lots of volume will
flow out of a tank of water through a short, fat pipe. But depth
difference affects the volume flow: if the tank isn't full, less will
flow out. Second, the material also has an effect. Less volume
flows if the tank is filled with honey than if it's filled with water.
Third, flow-path area affects volume flow; there is less flow
through a thin pipe than a fat one. Fourth, the length of the flow
path is important, since less water flows through a long pipe
than through a short one.

Now let's discuss convection. Heat flow by convection
occurs when a gas such as air or a liquid such as water flows by
a surface. In the example used earlier, the surface was your skin
as air blew by it. As with conduction heat flow, convection heat
flow depends on several factors. One factor, we've already
learned, is temperature difference. In convection heat flow, it's
the temperature difference between the surface and the convecting
gas or liquid that's important. Other important factors
are:

1. the area of the surface
2. the speed of the air or water over the surface
3. whether it's gas or liquid that flows by the surface.

The larger the surface area is, the more convection heat is
lost from the surface. If you have the same amount of soup in a
bowl as in a mug, the bowl will cool faster than the mug because
its surface area is larger than the mug's. Second, the speed at
which the convection gas or liquid flows by the surface influences
how quickly the heat flows. Suppose two bricks are
placed in an oven, heated to the same temperature, and then
taken out. One is placed on a table in still air; the other is placed
in front of a fan. The one sitting in still air would cool much
more slowly than the one sitting In front of a fan. You might
think that the brick in still air wouldn't have any air flowing by it
at all. Actually, air is flowing by-but much more slowly than if
the fan were blowing air by it. The brick heats the air near it,
which gets lighter and rises and is replaced by cooler air, which
in turn is warmed and rises. This phenomenon is called natural
convection, since no fan is needed to cause the air to move: the
air rises past the surface simply because the surface is hot.

Smoke rising from a cigarette illustrates how natural convection
removes heat from burning tobacco; the smoke moves with the
air, showing how a hot object causes air to move by it. Conversely,
cold surfaces also cause convection, but in the opposite
direction. Convection currents fall from a cold object, as you
may have noticed when opening the freezer door to the refrigerator.

The last factor that is important in convection heat flow is
whether a gas or a liquid is involved. Liquids are much better
than gases at causing heat to flow from a surface. Eggs cook in
a few minutes in boiling water, but they would take many times
longer to cook in an oven at the same temperature. The eggs
gain heat slowly by air-a gas-convecting over them, but they
heat up quickly when water-a liquid-is convecting over them.

In summary, convection heat flows fastest when there are
big temperature differences of large surfaces with liquid flowing
by them quickly. Little convection heat flows with small temperature
differences of small surfaces In still air.
