20. A PASSIVE SYSTEM - DIRECT GAIN

Passive solar heating systems are those which don't use pumps
or fans to transport the solar heat. They are passive because all
they use to operate is the sun's heat. Active systems, such as
we've learned about so far, use active power-usually electricity-
to operate.

A direct-gain passive system is the simplest of passive
solar heating systems. As with most passive systems, they are
used primarily for house heating. In a direct-gain system, the
house itself becomes a huge solar collector. Imagine a house
that had the entire south wall made of glass and had lots of
insulation on the roof and other walls. Sunlight entering the
south-facing wall would be absorbed by the floor, furniture, and
inside walls. The heat would be trapped inside by the glass wall
just as a solar collector's heat is trapped by glazing. Well-insulated
roof and walls prevents heat loss out of the house just the
way a collector's insulation prevents heat loss out of the back of
the collector.

The simple direct-gain house might not be very comfortable
to live in. During the day it could get very hot inside-remember
how hot your car gets after sitting all day in the sun
with the windows shut. At night it could get cold, because little
of the solar heat collected during the day would be available to
heat the house at night. For some buildings these problems
aren't crucial. A school, for example, needs heat only during the
day, and windows can always be opened to keep the building
from getting too hot. Homes and most other buildings, though,
need heat at night as well as during the day.

Active solar heating systems need storage to hold solar
heat until night, and so do passive systems. Storage can be
added to the direct-gain system just described by constructing
the floor and inside walls of material that stores heat. For example,
the floors can be made of thick rock or concrete. When the
sun strikes the floor, the rock heats up and remains warm until
nighttime; as it slowly loses its heat, it keeps the house warm.

Sometimes drums of water are put inside a room to
increase heat storage-water, remember, stores more heat than
rock or concrete do. For best results, the water drums or thick
rock floor should be in the direct sunlight, so that the storage is
also the solar radiation absorber. The more heat storage there is
in water drums and rock floors, the less tendency there is for a
direct-gain house to overheat. A huge heat store will not get as
hot after a day of absorbing solar heat, nor will it cool as quickly
at night. The bigger the heat store, the less the temperature
swing-the tendency to be too hot in the late afternoon and too
cold in the morning.

The rainwater analogy to a direct-gain house is a collector
tray directly attached to a large storage tank. The tank is
large because the equivalent heat storage must be large to
reduce temperature swing. The tank represents the heat stored
in the house's floor or water drums; the water depth in the tank
represents the house's temperature. A house loses heat to the
outdoors; analogously, the tank must also have a leak. As
before, the pipe on the collecting tray has a leak; it represents
the heat leaking from the glass south wall on our direct-gain
house. The rainwater tray collects the rain, filling the tank.
When the rain stops, no rainwater flows down the pipe but water
is still lost from both the pipe leak and the tank leak. The water
level will slowly drop as the rainwater leaks out. It takes a long
time to fill a large tank, so its depth doesn't rise very high; nor
does a large tank drain quickly. The bigger the tank is, the less is
the rise and fall of the water depth. Analogously, the bigger the
heat storage is, the less the temperature swing is.

When we learned about active systems, we learned that
the controller serves an important function in preventing nighttime 
heat loss. The solar collectors in an active system are separated 
from the storage. Only the heat transfer medium (air or
water) moves heat from the collectors to the storage. When the
controller turns off the fan or pump, no heat can be transported
from storage back to the collector. In a direct-gain system,
though, the collector and storage aren't separated. The solar
collector is the heat storage (the thick concrete floors).

Unless the collector and the storage are separated, heat
can leak from storage out the collector's glazing. Remember, in
Chapter 8 we found that windows leak ten times the amount of
heat of a well-insulated wall. An entire south wall of glass, then,
represents a big heat loss. Even though the glass wall admits
solar radiation during the day that heats the thick floor, at night
the same glass wall loses much of the stored heat to the outdoors.

Not only do active solar heating systems have their heat
storage separated from their collectors, but their storage is also
separated from the living space. Stored heat can be used when
required: a heat exchanger can extract solar heat from a water
storage tank in a water-heating system, and in an air-heating
system a distribution fan can blow solar-heated air from a
rockbed. More important, when heat isn't needed, it can remain
in storage. But in a direct-gain passive house, the heat storage
isn't separated from the living space. If the floor of your direct-gain
house gets too hot or too cold, so do you.

As we look at other types of passive solar heating besides
the direct-gain system, we'll think of them as having either a
diode function or a control function. Diode is a term borrowed
from electronics, and it refers to a device that lets electric current
flow in only one direction. Thus, the diode function of a
passive solar heating system lets heat flow in only one direction-
into the house but not out of it. The control function, on
the other hand, lets stored heat be controlled-distributing it to
the living space when and where it's needed.

Active systems accomplish the diode function by separating
the solar collectors from the storage. The two are thermally
linked only when it's advantageous: when the collector is
hotter than the storage. An active system accomplishes the
control function by separating the storage from the living space.
The two are thermally linked only when it's advantageous: when
the living space gets too cold.

