13. SOLAR HEATING APPLICATIONS

Efficiency, as we've just learned, depends on the collector's
temperature. A collector that stays cool loses little heat to the
outdoors; one that's hot leaks a lot of heat. Consider a solar
swimming-pool heater. Collectors on the roof, quite similar to
the ones just described in Chapter 12, absorb solar radiation and
heat the water being pumped through them. But, instead of
using a storage tank, the pool itself stores the solar-heated
water.

A swimming-pool solar collector gets very high efficiency
because it uses heat only at relatively low temperatures.
The water pumped into the collector is cool water from the pool.
The water going into the collectors might be 80° F and the water
coming out might be 90° F, so on the average the collector stays
fairly cool. Solar pool heaters are used mostly in the late spring
and early fall, so the daytime temperature (when all the solar
collecting is going on) is perhaps 60° to 80° F. Since heat loss
is due to temperature difference, the small temperature
difference (maybe 20° F) between the collector and the outdoors
means little heat will be lost from a solar swimming-pool collector.
Low heat loss, of course, means high efficiency. Even
the simplest solar swimming-pool collectors can get efficiencies
of 75 percent or more. Three-quarters of the solar radiation
striking the collector ends up heating the pool water; only 
one-quarter of the heat is lost.

For most other applications of solar heating-notably
home heating and hot-water heating-conditions are not so
favorable for high efficiency. For example, in solar heating your
home, the temperature on a cold winter day might be 30° F outdoors
at the same time the storage tank temperature is 130° F. A
100° F temperature difference between the collector and the
outdoors means you would lose about five times the heat of a
solar pool heater when the temperature difference was only
20° F. With losses this high, efficiency would be very low.

In heating water the problem is similar to house heating:
it's cold outside and you want hot water. Lukewarm water
coming from a solar water heater isn't good enough. As in house
heating, the daytime temperature in winter might be about 30° F
outdoors while the stored heat might be at 130° F. Again, a
100°F temperature difference between the collector and outdoors
means that lots of heat is lost and efficiency is low.

Note that in the solar hot-water heater, the storage tank
and the collectors are much smaller than those used for house
heating. Since in most parts of the country more heat is needed
to heat a house than to heat water for the same house, a solar
hot-water heater is usually quite small compared with a solar
space-heating system.

For either house heating or hot-water heating a simple
solar collector such as the one we've discussed so far won't
work too well. What's appropriate for swimming-pool heating is
too inefficient for house and hot-water heating.
