8. HOUSE HEAT LOSSES

Houses lose their heat because it's hotter inside than outside.
How exactly is the heat lost? Mostly it is lost in three ways: heat
leaking by conduction through the walls and roof; heat leaking
by radiation and convection through windows; and heat leaking
by transport through cracks in windows and doors.

Conduction losses through walls and roofs usually
account for about half of the total heat loss in an uninsulated
house. But if fiberglass batting or plastic foam is used to insulate 
the walls and thick fiberglass batting insulates the roof, the
conduction losses can easily be cut in half. The thicker the insulation
is, the less heat is lost by conduction. A roof with three
inches of fiberglass insulation will lose twice as much heat as a
roof with six inches of insulation.

The next most important heat loss is through windows.
Even though ordinarily very little surface area of a house is made
up of windows, heat losses through windows can amount to as
much as the heat loss through an insulated wall. If a well-insulated
wall of your house is one-tenth glass, as much heat can be
lost by conduction through the wall as through windows-even
though the wall has a ten times larger area.

Window heat loss takes place by conduction, convection,
and radiation. Heat is convected and radiated to the inside surface
of the glass by the warm room. Even though we can see
through glass, in terms of radiation heat flow it's as if the glass
weren't transparent at all: the glass prevents radiation heat from
flowing directly outside. Once the heat reaches the inner surface
of the glass, it is conducted through the glass. Glass is a good
conductor, so the heat flows easily through the glass to the
glass's outer surface. Once there, the heat flows outdoors by
means of convection and radiation. Since the wind is often
blowing outdoors, heat leaves the window's outer surface very
easily.

The net effect of all these combined heat losses is that
windows aren't very good insulators. Heat losses through windows
can be cut down by using two layers of glass-as in
doubled-glazed windows or storm windows. A double-glazed
window has an air gap between the glass layers, so it's much
harder for heat to flow through it. As with glass made of a single
layer, it flows by convection and radiation to the window's inner
surface. Then it flows by conduction through the first glass
layer, by conduction and radiation through the air gap, by conduction
through the outer glass layer, and finally by convection
and radiation to the outdoors. Double-glazed windows lose
about half as much heat as a single-layered window; most of
this effect is due to the fact that the air gap acts as a good
insulator.

The third major heat loss from a house is by infiltration-
warm air leaking out through cracks in the walls, doors,
windows and being replaced by cold outdoors air. Infiltration
can account for one-third of the heat loss of an uninsulated
house and a half or more of an insulated one. Many houses are
poorly built, and thus have quite a bit of air infiltration. On
other hand, if a house were completely sealed it would feel
stuffy. In any case, cutting down on infiltration is an easy
matter. Infiltration heat losses can be reduced by 
weather-stripping doors and caulking windows.

To return to our water analogy. Recall that a house's heat
losses are equivalent to the holes in the bottom of a bucket. If
we insulate the house-reduce the conduction, window, and
infiltration losses-it's like making the holes in the
bucket smaller. Just as the furnace needs less heat to keep a 
well-insulated house warm, so a faucet needs to add less water to a bucket
with small holes to maintain a constant water level.

On the average, the furnace adds exactly what heat leaks
out of the house. If less heat leaks out, the furnace uses less
and your heating bill is less. Similarly, on the average the faucet
adds the same amount of water to the bucket as leaks out of it. If
the holes in the bucket are smaller, less water leaks out through
them and less water is needed from the faucet.

Conserving heat in a house by better insulating is probably
more important than solar heating the same house. A
solar heating system that could save half of your heating bill
might cost several times more than better insulation, which
could also save half of your heating bill. If your house is already
well insulated, then solar heating is probably worth the expense.

