24. REFLECTING SOLAR RADIATION

When we learned about solar radiation we found that it could be
reflected by mirrors or light-colored surfaces. If we can reflect
solar radiation in our solar collector, we can capture more sunlight.
The more sunlight we capture, the more heat we can get
out of the collector. This is true whether we are using an active
or a passive solar heater.

The simplest way to reflect sunlight into a collector is
from the ground. White or light-colored pebbles in front of a
Trombé wall system can add one-third more heat. In cold
climates, snow on the ground has the same effect, especially in
winter when the sun is low in the sky.

Ground reflection isn't too important in roof-mounted
collectors, especially those with a low tilt angle. 
Reflectors-mirrorlike surfaces often made of plastic film with a shiny
coating-are used to increase the solar radiation that normally
falls on a roof-mounted collector. Reflectors are cheaper than
collectors, so there's a cost advantage in adding reflectors to a
system. A disadvantage is that the reflectors need to be
adjusted regularly, though perhaps only from month to month.
One system, called Pyramidal Optic Condenser, uses the roof
peak of a house to hold reflectors. One of the reflectors is
adjusted to capture both the low winter sun and the high summer
sun.

The rainwater analogy to a reflector is a sheet which
catches some extra rain and lets it pour into the rainwater tray.
Since more rain is captured, more will flow down the pipe. But
even though we're capturing more rainwater, the leak doesn't get
any bigger. Losses are the same with or without the "reflected"
rainwater. Similarly, reflectors add heat (via solar radiation), but
only collectors lose heat. In the system just discussed, the 
collectors cover only about half of the area normally needed to heat
a house. Heat loss from the collectors is cut by half, yet the
reflectors insure that the same amount of solar radiation is
absorbed by the collectors.

Passive systems can also use reflectors. One method,
called Sun Louvers, uses venetian blind louvers with a shiny
upper surface to reflect sunlight onto the ceiling of a house or
apartment. Ceiling tiles filled with phase change material absorb
the reflected solar radiation. As you may recall, phase change
materials store heat without getting hot, so overheating is less
of a problem. The phase change material melts as it absorbs
solar radiation. Later at night, the melted phase change material
solidifies and gives off heat.

Reflectors are also important in solar air-conditioning. It
may seem strange that solar heat can be used for cooling.
However, using thermodynamic principles, heat can be used to
condense a vapor into a liquid. When the liquid evaporates again
into a vapor it extracts heat-that is, it cools. You feel cold when
you get out of the shower because the water evaporating from
your skin has a cooling effect.

Most of the thermodynamic cycles used for cooling need
heat at a very high temperature-200° F or more. The collectors
we've discussed so far may get that hot, but their efficiency is
very low. Ordinary glazing isn't good enough to yield high efficiency
at these high temperatures; heat losses must be further
reduced.

The collectors for solar air-conditioning, called evacuated-
tube collectors, cut heat loss in two ways. First, the
absorbing surfaces are surrounded by a tube-shaped vacuum
jacket similar to a fluorescent light bulb. The vacuum jacket
completely eliminates convection heat loss, since no air surrounds
the absorbing surface. Second, the absorbing surfaces
are made very small to reduce radiation heat loss-small areas
lose less heat than large ones. Reflectors are placed behind the
evacuated tubes, letting the smaller absorbing surfaces receive
as much solar radiation as a larger surface would.

Heat is removed from the absorbing surfaces by conduction
to tubes through which a liquid is pumped. The liquid often
must be a special one that won't boil at a high temperature. So
little heat is lost that these collectors achieve reasonably high
efficiency even though they operate at very high temperatures;
they are well suited to operating air-conditioning equipment.

Using solar heat for air-conditioning should be a good
match. The cooling is needed only when the sun is out; storing
heat for nighttime use isn't necessary. However, the extra
complication of reflectors, vacuum-jacketed collectors, and
heat-driven air conditioners can offset the cost of storage.
Nevertheless, evacuated-tube collectors can help cool buildings
in many hot climates such as the Southwest; they are also effective
in cooling many larger buildings such as stores in shopping
centers.
