18. USING STORED HEAT

Solar heat has been collected and stored in order to be used. In a
swimming-pool heater it's easy to use the stored heat. Instead
of pumping the solar-heated water to a heat storage tank, the
pool itself stores the sun's heat. But if we're trying to heat a
house or water, we need some way to get the heat out of storage.
By analogy, if we want to get the rainwater from the rainwater
collector, one way would be to tap into the side of the
storage tank. We can tap off some stored rainwater whether
we're simultaneously collecting rainwater or whether the rain
has stopped and we're only tapping off the stored rainwater.

Similarly, a heat storage tank can be "tapped" to yield its
stored heat. However, instead of actually removing the hot water
from the storage tank, a heat exchanger is usually used to
extract the heat-but not hot water. A heat exchanger consists
of a coil of copper tubing which sits inside the heat storage
tank; cool water is pumped into one end of the coil and hot water
flows out the other end. The stored hot water heats the outer
surface of the copper coil by natural convection; the heat flows
easily through the copper by conduction. The water flowing
through the coil is then heated by convection from the hot copper
surfaces that the water flows past. This kind of heat exchanger
is called a liquid-to-liquid heat exchanger, since heat is
transferred from one liquid (the hot storage water) to another
(the water pumped through the coil).

Cool water can be pumped into the heat exchanger
whether or not the solar energy system is also collecting heat. It
is possible to withdraw heat from storage while simultaneously
adding solar heat to storage. The only requirement for the heat
exchanger is that the stored water must be hotter than the cool
incoming water.

Let's consider the case of heating water. Usually a solar
heating system is used as a preheater for a conventional gas,
oil, or electrical hot-water heater. Cold water from a well or
water main flows through the heat exchanger before going to the
conventional auxiliary unit, as it is sometimes called.

The preheater arrangement has several advantages. First,
the stored solar-heated water only has to be hotter than the
water main temperature to extract stored heat. Usually, the
water main temperature is about the same as the ground temperature,
so even a little sunlight can heat the water from the main.
Second, if the solar heater cannot get the water hot enough, the
auxiliary hot-water heater can top it off. In the winter, for example,
the water main temperature could be 50° F. The solar heater
might only be able to heat it to 100° F. The auxiliary heater
needs only to heat it another 30° for its temperature to reach the
desired 130° F. Most of the heat was added by the solar heater,
but some was added by the auxiliary heater. Since most people
are accustomed to regulated hot water, having a conventional
auxiliary unit in addition to the solar preheater is almost a
necessity.

Similarly, in house heating, a solar heating system can
be used as a preheater for a conventional furnace. Let's suppose
we're solar heating a house that is heated by forced air (forcing
heated air through air ducts). We can extract solar heat from our
storage tank with a liquid-to-air heat exchanger.

Recall that we've already used a liquid-to-liquid heat
exchanger to extract heat from our storage for hot-water
heating. The two types of heat exchangers look distinctly different. 
This is because it is so much easier to transfer heat to water
than to air, and much more surface must be exposed to the air
than to the water.

In a liquid-to-air heat exchanger (a car radiator is one
type), hot water pumped through many parallel tubes transfers
heat to the air by way of hundreds of thin metal fins attached to
the tubes. Heat flows easily into the metal tubes from the flowing
hot water. Then it's conducted easily along the fins, insuring
that lots of hot fin surface is exposed to the air blowing by.
Because heat doesn't flow easily by convection from a surface
into air, a lot of fin surface is needed and the air must blow fast
over the fins.

In heating a house with a solar preheater, a liquid-to-liquid
heat exchanger draws heat from the solar heat storage and
feeds it into a liquid-to-air heat exchanger. The latter transfers
heat to the air flowing into a furnace-often an electric furnace.
If the air is sufficiently hot, the furnace's coils never come on.
But if the solar heat storage is too cool, the coil of the furnace
will add additional heat to the air.

Solar heat is also used as a preheater for a conventional
heating system. Note that even though electricity is a very
expensive fuel, it is used only a fraction of the time: the house is
primarily solar heated, and electricity is used as a back-up.

So far we've talked about preheater, or series arrangements
of solar and auxiliary heating systems. Series, in electrical
terms, means flowing first into one and then into the other;
the auxiliary adds its heat only after the solar heat is added.
Another arrangement is a parallel one where both the solar
heating system and the auxiliary unit directly heat the house. An
example of a parallel arrangement is a house that is simultaneously
heated by electric baseboard heating and hot-water
baseboard heating. Both systems add heat to the house, but the
electric auxiliary system comes on only when the temperature of
the solar storage is insufficient to heat the house.

There are many other ways that solar energy can be
coupled with an auxiliary unit for house and hot-water heating.
The ones shown here are just a few of the possibilities.

But why have an auxiliary unit at all? Without one you
couldn't count on having your hot water or house heated after
several days of cloudy weather. Then why not store a week's
supply of heat? From an economic viewpoint, storing much
more than a day or two's heat supply becomes expensive. A
storage tank that holds a week's supply of heat costs much more
than one that holds a day's supply. Although some solar energy
heating systems have been, built to store heat for months at a
time, the majority of residential systems store only a day's heat
supply.
