1. The tendency of a rolling ball is to continue rolling in the absence of a force. The fact that it slows down is likely due to the force of friction.

2.

3. He discredited Aristotle's idea that the rate at which bodies fall is proportional to their weight.

4.

5. Galileo proposed the concept of inertia before Newton was born.

6.

7. Nothing keeps the probe moving. In the absence of a propelling or deflecting force, it would continue moving in a straight line.

8.

9. You should disagree with your friend. In the absence of external forces, a body at rest tends to remain at rest; if moving, it tends to remain moving. Inertia is a property of matter to behave this way, not some kind of force.

10.

11. The tendency of the ball is to remain at rest. From a point of view outside the wagon, the ball stays in the place as the back of the wagon moves toward it. (Because of friction, the ball may roll along the cart surface-without friction the surface would slide beneath the ball.)

12.

13. Your body tends to remain at rest, in accord with Newton's first law. The back of the seat pushes you forward. Without support at the back of your head, your head is not pushed forward with your body, likely injuring your neck. Hence, headrests are recommended.

14.

15. The law of inertia applies in both cases. When the bus slows, you tend to keep moving at the previous speed and lurch forward. When the bus picks up speed, you tend to keep moving at the previous (lower) speed and you lurch backward.

16.

17. If there were no friction acting on the cart, it would continue in motion when you stop pushing. But friction does act, and the cart slows. This doesn't violate the law of inertia because an external force indeed acts.

18.

19. If there were no force acting on the ball, it would continue in motion without slowing. But air drag does act, along with slight friction in the lane, and the ball slows. This doesn't violate the law of inertia because external forces indeed act.

20.

21. In mechanical equilibrium, the vector sum of all forces, the net forces, necessarily equals zero: (SIGMA)F = 0.

22.

23. If only a single nonzero force acts on an object, its motion will change and will not be in mechanical equilibrium. There would have to be other forces to result in a zero net force for equilibrium.

24.

25. If the puck moves in a straight line with unchanging speed, the forces of friction are negligible. Then the net force is practically zero, and the puck can be considered to be in dynamic equilibrium.

26.

27. The scale will read half her weight. In this way, the net force (upward pull of left rope + upward pull of right rope - weight) = 0.

28.

29. The upper limit he can lift is a load equal to his weight. Beyond that he leaves the ground!

30.

31. The force that prevents downward acceleration is the support (normal) force-the table pushing up on the book.

32.

33. Normal force is greatest when the table surface is horizontal, and progressively decreases as the angle of the tilt increases. As the angle of the tilt approaches 90 degrees, the normal force approaches zero. When the table surface is vertical, it no longer presses on the book, which freely falls.

34.

35. If the upward force were the only force acting, the book indeed would rise. But another force, that due to gravity, results in the net force being zero.

36.

37. Without water, the support force is W. With water, the support force is W + w.

38.

39. The friction force is 600 N for constant speed. Only then will (SIGMA)F = 0.

40.

41. The net force on the rope is zero. The force exerted by the rope on each person is 300 N (in opposite directions).

42.

43. We aren't swept off because we are traveling just as fast as the Earth, just as in a fast-moving vehicle you move along with the vehicle. Also, there is no atmosphere through which the Earth moves, which would do more than blow our hats off!

44.

45. A body in motion tends to remain in motion, so you move with the moving Earth whether or not your feet are in contact with it. When you jump, your horizontal motion matches that of the Earth, traveling with it. Hence the wall does not slam into you.

46.

47. This is similar to Exercise 46. If the ball is shot while the train is moving at constant velocity (constant speed in a straight line), its horizontal motion before, during, and after being fired is the same as that of the train; so the ball falls back into the chimney as it would have if the train were at rest. If the train changes speed, the ball will miss because the ball's horizontal speed will match the train speed as the ball is fired, but not when the ball lands. Similarly, on a circular track the ball will aslo miss the chimney because the ball will move along a tangent to the track while the train turns away from this tangent. So the ball returns to the chimney in the first case, and misses in the second and third cases because of the change in motion.