;----
>susd-01
Let's suppose you owned a gold mine that contained only very low-grade gold ore. You would have to do a lot of digging before you got even a little gold. If you bought some expensive mining equipment, you could process much more of the low-grade ore and get more gold. Thus, even though the gold itself is free, it would be very costly to get very much of it out of the mine. You would have to balance the cost of the mining equipment against how much money you'd get when you sold your gold. If the gold were very valuable and the mining equipment relatively cheap, it might be worthwhile to dig up the gold. But if the equipment were expensive and the gold not very valuable, you'd be better off to leave it in the ground. Many gold mines in Utah that have only low-grade ore were closed down years ago; some have recently reopened because the price of gold has increased enough to make mining it worthwhile.
Solar energy is like the low-grade ore. The sun's rays must be mined, or collected, and then transformed into useful heat or electricity before they are worth anything.
;----
>susd-02
A hot brick loses heat to a cool room. The temperature difference-the brick's temperature minus the room's temperature-drives the heat from the brick. Heat leaks from the brick until the temperature difference is gone. No more heat flows from the brick when it becomes as cool as the room it is in.
Similarly, a full can of water will leak volume from a hole in the side of the can. The depth of the water is higher than the depth of the hole, so the depth difference drives volume out through the hole. Eventually, all the volume that can leak out does so. When this happens, the water depth has fallen so that it is the same as that of the hole. There is no more depth difference, so no more volume flows out through the hole. Just as a difference in temperature causes heat to flow, so a difference in depth causes volume to flow. When there is no temperature difference, heat flow ceases; when there is no depth difference, volume flow ceases.
;----
>susd-03
Why would you go to the trouble to use wax to store heat rather than water or crushed rocks? Because wax and other phase change materials can store a lot of heat. Wax can store several times the amount of heat of an equal volume of water and many times the heat of an equal volume of crushed rock. Wax itself is fairly expensive to use to store heat. Other phase change materials are cheaper and don't pose a fire hazard that wax might.
The water analogy to a phase change material is a tank that has a bulge in its sides. When the water depth is below the bulge, adding volume only increases the depth, as it would in any other tank. But when the depth reaches the bulge, a lot more volume is needed to raise the depth. Extra volume is stored in the bulge just as extra heat is stored in the wax when it melts. If the tank is drained the extra volume can be recovered, just as the latent heat in the wax can be recovered when it solidifies. When the water depth in a tank is at the level of the bulge, volume can be added or taken away without changing the depth much. Similarly, when wax is near its melting temperature, heat can be added or taken away without changing the wax's temperature much.
;----
>susd-04
Now, remember the water analogy to heat and temperature. The temperature of an object is equivalent to the water depth of a tank; the heat is equivalent to the volume of water; and the heat flow is equivalent to the water flow. How could we make the water equivalent of a house-heating system? Suppose we let water pour from a faucet into a bucket that has small holes in its bottom. The faucet is equivalent to a house's furnace because the faucet adds water to the bucket just as a furnace adds heat to a house. The holes in the bucket represent the way the heat leaks from the house. When the faucet adds water to the bucket, it leaks out through the holes; when the furnace adds heat to the house, it leaks out through the walls, doors, windows, roof, and cellar.
The depth of water in the bucket is equivalent to the room temperature in the house. While the temperature difference is what drives the heat from the house, the depth difference is what drives the water from the bucket. The depth difference is simply the depth of water in the bucket, since the holes are at the bucket's bottom. The bottom of the bucket is equivalent to the outdoors temperature.
Just as the thermostat keeps the house's temperature relatively stable, you could keep the depth of the water in the bucket relatively constant. Suppose you were to draw a line on the bucket indicating the depth you wanted to hold. If the depth dropped below the line, you'd turn on the faucet. Similarly, when a thermostat senses that the house is getting a little too cold, it turns on the furnace. The faucet adds water to the bucket just as the furnace adds heat to the house. When the depth went higher than the line on the bucket, you'd turn off the faucet. Likewise, when the thermostat senses that the house's temperature is getting a little too hot, it turns off the furnace. After a while, the water would leak out of the holes in the bucket and the depth would drop below the line. It wouldn't happen very fast, because the bucket stores volume and it would take a while for the volume to leak away. Similarly, the heat flows from a house through all of its heat leaks, and the house slowly drops in temperature as it loses heat. When the water goes below the marked line, you'd again turn on the faucet and begin the cycle again.
If you were very diligent, you'd be able to keep the depth pretty close to the line on the bucket by turning the faucet on and off properly. Since you were holding the depth more or less constant, the water lost through the holes would be more or less constant. If you held the depth constant for a long time, say an hour, the total volume that poured into the bucket would equal the volume that leaked out during the same hour. Just as the faucet adds as much volume each hour as is necessary to balance the water leakage during that hour, so a furnace adds the same amount of heat that leaks out of the house each hour.
Suppose we set the house's thermostat at 65 F instead of 70 F. What would happen? Heat losses would be less because the temperature difference would also be less. Your heating bill would be less too, because the furnace adds just what the house loses. Similarly, if you marked another line on the bucket at a lower level and kept the depth at this lower line, the water leakage would be less. Since depth differences drive out the water through the holes, less water leaks out. On the average, the faucet adds just as much water as leaks out, so you would use less water at the lower line that at the higher line.
Our country's leaders have urged us to turn down our thermostats to save scarce energy resources-now you have an understanding of why it helps.
;----
>susd-05
To return to our water analogy. Recall that a house's heat losses are equivalent to the holes in the bottom of a bucket. If we insulate the house-reduce the conduction, window, and infiltration losses-it's like making the holes in the bucket smaller. Just as the furnace needs less heat to keep a  well-insulated house warm, so a faucet needs to add less water to a bucket with small holes to maintain a constant water level.
On the average, the furnace adds exactly what heat leaks out of the house. If less heat leaks out, the furnace uses less and your heating bill is less. Similarly, on the average the faucet adds the same amount of water to the bucket as leaks out of it. If the holes in the bucket are smaller, less water leaks out through them and less water is needed from the faucet.
Conserving heat in a house by better insulating is probably more important than solar heating the same house. A solar heating system that could save half of your heating bill might cost several times more than better insulation, which could also save half of your heating bill. If your house is already well insulated, then solar heating is probably worth the expense.
;----
>susd-06
Solar collectors can be thought of as big nets which gather the solar radiation that strikes them. Just as a bucket in a rainstorm collects rain, so a solar collector collects the solar radiation raining down on it.
If you were trying to collect the most rain you could in a bucket, you'd hold the bucket at the proper angle to catch the rain. The open top of the bucket is the rain collector, and you'd point it toward the rain. If the rain were coming straight down you'd hold the top level, but if the rain were driven by the wind you'd tilt the bucket so that the top would still face the rain. Similarly, a solar collector should point toward the sun to pick up the most solar radiation possible. How can you tell if the sun is pointed at the collectors? If a small peg sticking straight out from the collector leaves no shadow, then the collector is pointed straight at the sun.
;----
>susd-07
If we faced the plate toward the sun at noon, it would begin to get hot as it absorbed solar heat. How hot would it get?
We can learn a lot about a solar collector by thinking of it in terms of a rainwater collector. Imagine that we are building a device to collect rainwater. As a start, we get a big tray to catch the rainwater, just as a solar collector collects, or absorbs, solar radiation. We attach a capped pipe to the tray so that all the rain falling in the tray will flow down the pipe and be caught.
Suppose the only capped pipe we can find is one that leaks. As the tray collects rain, the pipe fills; but rainwater flows out through the leak. The deeper the water gets in the pipe, the more water leaks out. At some point the depth gets so high that the flow out the leak balances the incoming flow of rainwater. Once this point is reached, the water gets no deeper. When the incoming rainwater exactly balances the outgoing water loss through the leak, the depth of water in the pipe is at its stagnation depth.
Similarly, the stagnation temperature is how hot a collector gets when the incoming solar radiation exactly balances the heat losses that take place by radiation and convection. To continue our analogy, the tray captures rainwater as the solar collector captures solar radiation. Just as the water in the pipe gets deeper and deeper, so does the temperature of the plate become hotter and hotter. And just as more water flows out through the leak as the water In the pipe gets deeper, so more heat leaks off the front of the solar collector by radiation and convection as the plate gets hotter. At some point the plate gets so hot that the heat losses exactly balance the incoming solar radiation. Once this point is reached, the plate gets no hotter.
The stagnation temperature of a surface-the hottest a surface exposed to the sun can get-depends on how much solar radiation is absorbed. The amount of radiation absorbed depends on the color of the surface, the angle of the sun's rays striking the collector, and how much sunlight actually strikes it. The best setup to use to absorb solar radiation is the one just described: a black surface squarely facing the sun on a clear day. A light-colored surface, a surface not directly facing the sun, or an overcast day will reduce the amount of solar radiation absorbed by the surface.
How will less absorbed radiation affect the stagnation temperature? Let's use the analogy of the rainwater collector again to understand what happens. Suppose a light rain is falling  on the tray rather than a heavy rain-that's comparable to less solar radiation striking the solar collector. With less rain falling, the tray collects less and the incoming rainwater flow is less. Recall that when we discussed house heating, we found that a lower water depth in the bucket resulted in less flow out through the bucket's holes: high depths are associated with high leakage; low depths, with low leakage. Thus, if less rainwater is flowing down the pipe, the depth needn't be as high to force all of the incoming water out through the holes. The water in the pipe wouldn't be as deep before the flow out through the holes balanced the incoming rainwater flow. We can conclude from this that if the incoming rainwater is less, the stagnation depth also goes down.
How can we apply this analogy to the solar collector? We would expect the stagnation temperature to be less if the absorbed solar radiation was less (since the stagnation depth was less when the rainfall was less). When less solar radiation is absorbed, our simple solar collector starts to get hot. It will lose more and more heat as it gets hotter. Eventually the heat losses will equal the amount of solar radiation absorbed. But since the solar radiation absorbed is less, the collector won't be very hot when the losses balance the absorbed radiation.
How hot our simple solar collector gets depends on how much solar radiation it absorbs. We've gotten the plate hot, but we haven't gotten any heat from it yet-the plate may be collecting solar radiation, but it's not doing us any good. You can't pay your heating bills with a hot black plate. We want heat from a solar heating system, not temperature.
;----
>sound-01
Perhaps you have thrown a rubber ball against a cement sidewalk, or a brick wall, and noticed that the ball bounced back.
If you threw the ball into a pillow, it would not bounce back.
Sound does much the same thing. 
It will bounce back, or be reflected, from a hard surface, such as walls of concrete, brick, and rock.
When sound hits a soft surface such as curtains, rugs, and cloth draperies, it does not bounce back.
When a sound hits a pillow, does it bounce back?
When a sound hits a sidewalk, does it bounce back?
 
;----
>atmosphere-01
 
If you live in a part of the world where it gets cold in the winter, you probably know how
nice it feels to snuggle under the thick layers of a padded quilt. but no matter where you
live, you are always surrounded by a sort of planetary quilt. It's the blanket of air called
the atmosphere. Like any good quilt, the atmosphere covers and warms you. But rather than
safeguarding just one person, the atmosphere protects everything on our planet.
 
;----
>atmosphere-02
 
Gases that trap heat in this way are called greenhouse gases, and their warming abiltiy is
known as the greenhouse effect. The names come from a garden building - a greenhouse - that is
made mostly of glass. In the same way that a glass greenhouse lets in sunlight and traps
warmth, atmospheric gases block heat but not light. The plants inside a greenhouse can grow
even if the weather is very cold outside. Likewise, living things on our planet thrive even
though conditions beyond our atmosphere cannot support life.
 
;----
>cells-silverstein-01
 
Look about you. The people in the street, the birds sitting on the branch of a tree, and
even the tree itself-all of these have something in common. They and all other living
things are made up of tiny building blocks of life, called cells.
 
These cells are so complicated that you need a microscope to see them. And yet they are
much more complicated than wooden building blocks.
 
Just as blocks can be used to build various structures - houses and bridges and tunnels -
nature uses her building blocks, the cells, the make more than a million different kinds
of living creatures. From tiny cells are made huge whales, larger than a house. But the
cells in a timid little mouse, hiding on a dark corner, are just as large as the cells in
the whale. For it is not the size of an animals cells that makes it large or small, but
how many cells it has.
 
Plants, too are made of the same kind of building blocks. The giant redwood trees in
California are made of tiny cells, and so is the grass on the front lawn.

;----
>cells-silverstein-02

But what is a cell? Just as the words of our language are made up of cells, the basic
units of life. And just as there are many letters in the alphabet, there are many kinds of
cells. They have different sizes and shapes, and they have different functions.
 
;----
>cells-silverstein-03
 
Although most cells are smaller than a pin, each is a busy factory. There are thousands of
different chemicals in a cell, and each one seems to have a special job to do. Something
is happening all the time. Chemicals are being freshly made, and other chemicals are
passing in or out of the cell through a special wall called the cell membrane.
 
Just as a factory has a main office, which tells all the workers what jobs to do, the cell
has a "main office" called the nucleus. In this small structure, often buried in the
middle of the cell, are the "brains" of the factory.
 
;----
>elgin-muscles-01
 
All muscles can shorten, or contract. By shortening, they make various parts of your body
move. To see how this works, take a strong rubber band and stretch it out as far as it will
go. Then relax one of your hands and let the band shorten. Does your hand move with the
rubber band?
 
Muscles work the same way as the rubber band. When the muscles contract, they move the parts
of the body to which they are fastened.
 
;----
>gbw-01
 
The glass of a greenhouse lets the short solar rays pass through.
These are absorbed by objects inside and are re-radiated as long heat rays.
But these long heat rays cannot get through the glass.
The heat rays are continually re-absorbed an re-radiated inside.
This helps keep the greenhouse warm on cold days.
Some heat is lost by conduction through the glass.
 
Like a greenhouse, the earth's atmosphere admits most of the solar radiation.
When this is absorbed by the earth's surface, it is re-radiated as heat waves, most of which are trapped by water vapor and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
Thus the earth is kept warm.
 
;----
>gbw-02
The atmosphere as a thermostat controls the earth's heat as automatically as in any heating system.
It protects the earth from too much solar radiation during the day, and screens out dangerous rays.
It acts as an insulating blanket which keeps most of the heat from escaping at night.
Without its thick atmosphere the earth would experience temperatures like the moon's.
The moon's surface temperature reaches the boiling point of water (212 degrees Fahrenheit) during the two-week lunar day.
It drops to 238 degrees Fahrenheit below zero during the long lunar night.
 
The earth cools faster on bright clear nights than on cloudy nights, because an overcast sky reflects a large amount of heat back to earth, where it is once again re-absorbed.
 
Atmosphere moderates daytime temperatures and retards night heat loss.
Night clouds trap the earth's heat.
On a clear night more heat escapes.
 
;----
>gbw-03
A full understanding of the weather requires knowledge of the atmosphere.
We live at the bottom of a virtual ocean of air.
Extending upwards perhaps 1000 miles, this massive, restless ocean is far different, and far more tempestuous, than the watery oceans that cover three-fourths of the globe.
A narrow band of compacted air lying just above the earth is the region of continuous winds.
Here, the rising and falling air currents sometimes develop into violent storms.
Only since 1960 have advanced aircraft flown above the highest parts of this thin layer, some 5 to 11 miles thick.
 
The ocean of air differs in one major way from an ocean of water.
Water is nearly incompressible.
A cubic foot of water on an ocean bottom weighs much the same as a cubic foot near the surface.
But the air of the atmospheric ocean is highly compressible.
A cubic foot of air at the surface weighs billions of times as much as a cubic foot at the outer edge of the atmosphere.
The atmosphere thins so rapidly as one leaves the earth that, only 3.5 miles up, over half of the atmosphere by weight would like below you.
It is chiefly in this 3.5 mile blanket of heavy air that weather changes are born.
The atmosphere 500 miles out is so thin that there are only about 22 million molecules of air per cubic inch, compared to billions upon billions at the earth's surface.
Still farther out, the ever-thinning atmosphere blends with the stray gases and dust of outer space.
 
 
;----
>gbw-04
In this layer are nearly all of the clouds.
Here is where weather occurs.
Air, heated by contact with the earth, rises and is replaced by colder air.
These vertical currents create horizontal winds at or near the surface of the earth.
Water, evaporated from the land and seas, rises with the ascending warm air.
As the air rises, the surrounding pressure lessens, so it steadily expands.
Expansion is a cooling process.
If the air rises high enough, it cools until condensation forms clouds.
 
Expansion of any gas is a cooling process.
Compression creates heat.
The cylinder and hose of a tire pump get hot as air is pumped and compressed.
The sudden expansion of gas rushing out of a spray can cools the tip.
 
Most air conditioners work on the same principle.
A gas is compressed in the part outside the house.
The heat of compression is given off to the outside air, and the gas condenses to a liquid.
The liquid is forced through a tiny nozzle and expands suddenly in the coils inside the house.
This expansion (and evaporation back to a gas) cools the coils and also the air which is blown over the coils into the room.
 
The troposphere has a kind of automatic air conditioner.
The primary heat pump is, of course, the sun.
It heats the earth's surface which, in turn, heats the air in contact with it.
The air expands, becomes lighter, and rises.
But the higher it rises the more it expands, because the pressure around it is steadily lessening.
And the more it expands, the more it cools.
This is an automatic cooling process which occurs without any loss of heat due to outside causes.
The rising air cools automatically at about 5.5 Fahrenheit for each 1000 feet it rises.
This is what happens when air rises up the side of a mountain.
When it goes down the other side, it begins compressing.
It warms up in doing so at the same rate (5.5 degrees Fahrenheit per 1000 feet) it cooled in rising.
This automatic temperature change in rising or falling air is called "adiabatic" warming or cooling.
Air need not be pushed up a mountain for this adiabatic change to take place.
Air rising over heated plains will also cool at the same rate of about 5.5 degrees Fahrenheit per 1000 foot rise.
 
;----
>gbw-05
Condensation complicates adiabatic cooling and warming.
Condensation makes the temperatures on the windward side of mountain ranges lower than those on the leeward side.
Mainly because of condensation, there are relatively cool valleys west of the Sierra Nevadas and hot deserts to the east.
 
Considerable heat is needed to change liquid water to water vapor.
Heat increases the speed of water molecules, so that many more escape as water vapor.
Changing a pan of water at the boiling point to vapor requires six times the heat needed to raise the same amount of water from freezing to boiling.
When water vapor condenses back into liquid water, the same large amount of heat is given off.
This heat can increase the temperature of the air considerably.
When air is rising, two opposing influences operate as its moisture condenses: adiabatic cooling tends to lower its temperature; and heat of condensation tends to raise it.
The net effect is an average cooling of 3.2 degrees Fahrenheit per 1000 feet of rise when condensation occurs.
 
Take an example: Air at 60 degrees Fahrenheit moves up the west side of a mountain.
It cools adiabatically 5.5 degrees Fahrenheit for each 1000 feet of rise up to the clouds at 4000 feet.  As condensation begins, heat is released, and the adiabatic cooling is thus partly offset.  From 4000 feet to the mountain top, at 10000 feet, the net cooling is only 3.2 degrees Fahrenheit per 1000 feet.  Thus the total cooling of the wind as it sweeps up the mountain is: 
4 * 5.5, or 22 degrees Fahrenheit from the valley floor to cloud base 
plus 6 * 3.2, or 19.2 degrees Fahrenheit from cloud base to mountain top
Total 41.2 degrees Fahrenheit from valley to mountain top.
The air that began at 60 degrees Fahrenheit tops the mountain at 18.8 degrees Fahrenheit.
 
As the air pours down the eastern slope, it compresses and warms, adiabatically, at the rate of 5.5 degrees Fahrenheit per 1000 feet.  Because of the warming, no further condensation occurs.  Total warming of the air from mountain top to valley, 10000 feet below, is 10 * 5.5. degrees Fahrenheit, or 55 degrees Fahrenheit.  Adding this to the mountain top temperature of 18.8 degrees Fahrenheit gives 73.8 degrees Fahrenheit as the temperature of the eastern valley.  The temperature at the eastern foot of the mountain is 13.8 degrees Fahrenheit higher than at the western foot.  Condensation and precipitation on the western slope made the difference.
 
Chinook winds are an example of this down-slope warming of air.  They occur on the eastern slope of the Rockies, often with dramatic effect.  One Chinook brought the temperature up from -6 degrees Fahrenheit to 37 degrees Fahrenheit in 15 minutes.
 
;----
>life-the-cell-01
 
The boy and girl represent molecules that are capable of getting together, but are
chemically shy. An enzyme - the matronly matchmaker - breaks the ice and then leaves,
chemically unchanged. Such a substance, which causes a reaction but is not changed by it,
is called a catalyst.
 
 
;----
>life-the-cell-02
 
Where does the energy come from that keeps a small boy going at full blast all day long?
For little boys, as for all living things, plant and animal, it comes from a tiny,
sausage-shaped pod with a Greek name, mitochondrion. The mitochondrion - along with
perhaps 1,000 more in every liver cell just like it - is the powerhouse of the cell.
 
Its job is like that of a generating plant in which a raw material - coal - is burned to
produce power - electricity - which is then sent out to light lamps, heat stoves, and
run machines. The mitochondrion's raw material is the food absorbed by the cell and
partly broken down in the cytoplasm. In a chemical operation, the cellular powerhouse
"burns" the food to release its energy and then loads this energy onto a chemical
molecule with a jawbreaker for a name: adenosine triphosphate, or ATP for short. This
precious stuff - essentially raw power - is to cells what electricity is to machines in
a factory: it runs them.
 
;----
>life-the-cell-03
 
The chlorophyll molecule is a complex organization of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and
oxygen atoms surrounding a magnesium atom. Associated with these atoms is a cloud of
orbiting, negatively-charged electrons that are normally in a low-energy state. When a ray
of sunlight strikes the green plant, one of these low-energy electrons may absorb a
particle (called a photon or quantum) of light energy and jump to a higher energy level.
 
For a rough idea of the nature of this reaction, think of a test-your-strength circus
sideshow. He swings a heavy mallet, slams it down on the padded end of a lever, and sends
a weight shooting up a a grooved shaft woard a bell at the top. The weight strikes the bell,
making a loud clang.
 
The raised weight in this analogy represents the electron after it has aborbed a light
photon and moved to a higher energy level. Now imagine that in another instant the electron,
will crash down to ground level and dissipate its energy.
 
;----
>scott-sound-01
 
After a rain you may have seen puddles along the sidewalk, or in empty lots. Perhaps you threw a small rock or pebble into the puddle and saw something interesting. Ripples or waves
formed in tiny circles around the spot where the pebble hit the water, then spread out into ever larger circles until the small waves reached the rim, or edge, of the puddle.
 
You don't have to wait for the next rain to have a puddle if you wish to experiment. Simply close the drain in the kitchen sink, and turn on the cold water. Get about one or two inches of water in the sink. Instead of using the sink, you may use a big pan with one or two inches of water in it.
 
Now drop a penny, button or any small object into the water and see what happens.
 
When the penny hits, it pushes against the water. This push, or disturbance, or motion going through the water is called a wave. It goes out in all directions.
 
We can't see sound waves, but they act like water waves.
 
You know a fire engine is roaring down the street, even without looking, because the horn or siren of the fire engine is vibrating or pushing against the air. This push going through
the air is what we call sound. When this push hits your eardrum, you hear. Hearing is the result of sound hitting your eardrum.
 
;----
>scott-sound-02
 
Perhaps you have thrown a rubber ball against a cement sidewalk, or a brick wall, and noticed that the ball bounced back.
If you threw the ball into a pillow, it would not bounce back.
Sound does much the same thing. 
It will bounce back, or be reflected, from a hard surface, such as walls of concrete, brick, and rock.
When sound hits a soft surface such as curtains, rugs, and cloth draperies, it does not bounce back.
The secret: bounced sound waves, which we call echoes.
