Let's suppose you owned a gold mine that contained only very low-grade gold ore. You would have to do a lot of digging before you got even a little gold. If you bought some expensive mining equipment, you could process much more of the low-grade ore and get more gold. Thus, even though the gold itself is free, it would be very costly to get very much of it out of the mine. You would have to balance the cost of the mining equipment against how much money you'd get when you sold your gold. If the gold were very valuable and the mining equipment relatively cheap, it might be worthwhile to dig up the gold. But if the equipment were expensive and the gold not very valuable, you'd be better off to leave it in the ground. Many gold mines in Utah that have only low-grade ore were closed down years ago; some have recently reopened because the price of gold has increased enough to make mining it worthwhile.
Solar energy is like the low-grade ore. The sun's rays must be mined, or collected, and then transformed into useful heat or electricity before they are worth anything.
;----
A hot brick loses heat to a cool room. The temperature difference-the brick's temperature minus the room's temperature-drives the heat from the brick. Heat leaks from the brick until the temperature difference is gone. No more heat flows from the brick when it becomes as cool as the room it is in.
Similarly, a full can of water will leak volume from a hole in the side of the can. The depth of the water is higher than the depth of the hole, so the depth difference drives volume out through the hole. Eventually, all the volume that can leak out does so. When this happens, the water depth has fallen so that it is the same as that of the hole. There is no more depth difference, so no more volume flows out through the hole. Just as a difference in temperature causes heat to flow, so a difference in depth causes volume to flow. When there is no temperature difference, heat flow ceases; when there is no depth difference, volume flow ceases.
;----
Why would you go to the trouble to use wax to store heat rather than water or crushed rocks? Because wax and other phase change materials can store a lot of heat. Wax can store several times the amount of heat of an equal volume of water and many times the heat of an equal volume of crushed rock. Wax itself is fairly expensive to use to store heat. Other phase change materials are cheaper and don't pose a fire hazard that wax might.
The water analogy to a phase change material is a tank that has a bulge in its sides. When the water depth is below the bulge, adding volume only increases the depth, as it would in any other tank. But when the depth reaches the bulge, a lot more volume is needed to raise the depth. Extra volume is stored in the bulge just as extra heat is stored in the wax when it melts. If the tank is drained the extra volume can be recovered, just as the latent heat in the wax can be recovered when it solidifies. When the water depth in a tank is at the level of the bulge, volume can be added or taken away without changing the depth much. Similarly, when wax is near its melting temperature, heat can be added or taken away without changing the wax's temperature much.
;----
Now, remember the water analogy to heat and temperature. The temperature of an object is equivalent to the water depth of a tank; the heat is equivalent to the volume of water; and the heat flow is equivalent to the water flow. How could we make the water equivalent of a house-heating system? Suppose we let water pour from a faucet into a bucket that has small holes in its bottom. The faucet is equivalent to a house's furnace because the faucet adds water to the bucket just as a furnace adds heat to a house. The holes in the bucket represent the way the heat leaks from the house. When the faucet adds water to the bucket, it leaks out through the holes; when the furnace adds heat to the house, it leaks out through the walls, doors, windows, roof, and cellar.
The depth of water in the bucket is equivalent to the room temperature in the house. While the temperature difference is what drives the heat from the house, the depth difference is what drives the water from the bucket. The depth difference is simply the depth of water in the bucket, since the holes are at the bucket's bottom. The bottom of the bucket is equivalent to the outdoors temperature.
Just as the thermostat keeps the house's temperature relatively stable, you could keep the depth of the water in the bucket relatively constant. Suppose you were to draw a line on the bucket indicating the depth you wanted to hold. If the depth dropped below the line, you'd turn on the faucet. Similarly, when a thermostat senses that the house is getting a little too cold, it turns on the furnace. The faucet adds water to the bucket just as the furnace adds heat to the house. When the depth went higher than the line on the bucket, you'd turn off the faucet. Likewise, when the thermostat senses that the house's temperature is getting a little too hot, it turns off the furnace. After a while, the water would leak out of the holes in the bucket and the depth would drop below the line. It wouldn't happen very fast, because the bucket stores volume and it would take a while for the volume to leak away. Similarly, the heat flows from a house through all of its heat leaks, and the house slowly drops in temperature as it loses heat. When the water goes below the marked line, you'd again turn on the faucet and begin the cycle again.
If you were very diligent, you'd be able to keep the depth pretty close to the line on the bucket by turning the faucet on and off properly. Since you were holding the depth more or less constant, the water lost through the holes would be more or less constant. If you held the depth constant for a long time, say an hour, the total volume that poured into the bucket would equal the volume that leaked out during the same hour. Just as the faucet adds as much volume each hour as is necessary to balance the water leakage during that hour, so a furnace adds the same amount of heat that leaks out of the house each hour.
Suppose we set the house's thermostat at 65 F instead of 70 F. What would happen? Heat losses would be less because the temperature difference would also be less. Your heating bill would be less too, because the furnace adds just what the house loses. Similarly, if you marked another line on the bucket at a lower level and kept the depth at this lower line, the water leakage would be less. Since depth differences drive out the water through the holes, less water leaks out. On the average, the faucet adds just as much water as leaks out, so you would use less water at the lower line that at the higher line.
Our country's leaders have urged us to turn down our thermostats to save scarce energy resources-now you have an understanding of why it helps.
;----
To return to our water analogy. Recall that a house's heat losses are equivalent to the holes in the bottom of a bucket. If we insulate the house-reduce the conduction, window, and infiltration losses-it's like making the holes in the bucket smaller. Just as the furnace needs less heat to keep a  well-insulated house warm, so a faucet needs to add less water to a bucket with small holes to maintain a constant water level.
On the average, the furnace adds exactly what heat leaks out of the house. If less heat leaks out, the furnace uses less and your heating bill is less. Similarly, on the average the faucet adds the same amount of water to the bucket as leaks out of it. If the holes in the bucket are smaller, less water leaks out through them and less water is needed from the faucet.
Conserving heat in a house by better insulating is probably more important than solar heating the same house. A solar heating system that could save half of your heating bill might cost several times more than better insulation, which could also save half of your heating bill. If your house is already well insulated, then solar heating is probably worth the expense.
;----
Solar collectors can be thought of as big nets which gather the solar radiation that strikes them. Just as a bucket in a rainstorm collects rain, so a solar collector collects the solar radiation raining down on it.
If you were trying to collect the most rain you could in a bucket, you'd hold the bucket at the proper angle to catch the rain. The open top of the bucket is the rain collector, and you'd point it toward the rain. If the rain were coming straight down you'd hold the top level, but if the rain were driven by the wind you'd tilt the bucket so that the top would still face the rain. Similarly, a solar collector should point toward the sun to pick up the most solar radiation possible. How can you tell if the sun is pointed at the collectors? If a small peg sticking straight out from the collector leaves no shadow, then the collector is pointed straight at the sun.
;----
If we faced the plate toward the sun at noon, it would begin to get hot as it absorbed solar heat. How hot would it get?
We can learn a lot about a solar collector by thinking of it in terms of a rainwater collector. Imagine that we are building a device to collect rainwater. As a start, we get a big tray to catch the rainwater, just as a solar collector collects, or absorbs, solar radiation. We attach a capped pipe to the tray so that all the rain falling in the tray will flow down the pipe and be caught.
Suppose the only capped pipe we can find is one that leaks. As the tray collects rain, the pipe fills; but rainwater flows out through the leak. The deeper the water gets in the pipe, the more water leaks out. At some point the depth gets so high that the flow out the leak balances the incoming flow of rainwater. Once this point is reached, the water gets no deeper. When the incoming rainwater exactly balances the outgoing water loss through the leak, the depth of water in the pipe is at its stagnation depth.
Similarly, the stagnation temperature is how hot a collector gets when the incoming solar radiation exactly balances the heat losses that take place by radiation and convection. To continue our analogy, the tray captures rainwater as the solar collector captures solar radiation. Just as the water in the pipe gets deeper and deeper, so does the temperature of the plate become hotter and hotter. And just as more water flows out through the leak as the water In the pipe gets deeper, so more heat leaks off the front of the solar collector by radiation and convection as the plate gets hotter. At some point the plate gets so hot that the heat losses exactly balance the incoming solar radiation. Once this point is reached, the plate gets no hotter.
The stagnation temperature of a surface-the hottest a surface exposed to the sun can get-depends on how much solar radiation is absorbed. The amount of radiation absorbed depends on the color of the surface, the angle of the sun's rays striking the collector, and how much sunlight actually strikes it. The best setup to use to absorb solar radiation is the one just described: a black surface squarely facing the sun on a clear day. A light-colored surface, a surface not directly facing the sun, or an overcast day will reduce the amount of solar radiation absorbed by the surface.
How will less absorbed radiation affect the stagnation temperature? Let's use the analogy of the rainwater collector again to understand what happens. Suppose a light rain is falling  on the tray rather than a heavy rain-that's comparable to less solar radiation striking the solar collector. With less rain falling, the tray collects less and the incoming rainwater flow is less. Recall that when we discussed house heating, we found that a lower water depth in the bucket resulted in less flow out through the bucket's holes: high depths are associated with high leakage; low depths, with low leakage. Thus, if less rainwater is flowing down the pipe, the depth needn't be as high to force all of the incoming water out through the holes. The water in the pipe wouldn't be as deep before the flow out through the holes balanced the incoming rainwater flow. We can conclude from this that if the incoming rainwater is less, the stagnation depth also goes down.
How can we apply this analogy to the solar collector? We would expect the stagnation temperature to be less if the absorbed solar radiation was less (since the stagnation depth was less when the rainfall was less). When less solar radiation is absorbed, our simple solar collector starts to get hot. It will lose more and more heat as it gets hotter. Eventually the heat losses will equal the amount of solar radiation absorbed. But since the solar radiation absorbed is less, the collector won't be very hot when the losses balance the absorbed radiation.
How hot our simple solar collector gets depends on how much solar radiation it absorbs. We've gotten the plate hot, but we haven't gotten any heat from it yet-the plate may be collecting solar radiation, but it's not doing us any good. You can't pay your heating bills with a hot black plate. We want heat from a solar heating system, not temperature.