The sun gives energy to the earth.
In the past, sunlight hit vegetation.
This created fuel.
In the present, humanity uses the fuel. 
The fuel is a fossil fuel, because the fuel is made of dead plants. 
Solar energy hits vegetation.
This causes the growing of the vegetation.
The vegetation turns into a fuel.
This is biomass energy. 
Wood for a fireplace is biomass energy.
Researchers try to grow new vegetation for energy. 
Researchers grow seaweed for production of methane.
Researchers grow trees for production of electricity.
The sun impacts wind currents.
The sun impacts ocean currents. 
The sun unevenly heats the earth.
This creates currents in the ocean.
A current is a river in the ocean.
The current makes electricity.
Wind powers a pump.
Wind grinds grain.
Solar radiation directly provides electricity.
Solar radiation directly provides heat.
A solar cell directly transforms sunlight into electricity. 
The solar cell is made of silicon.
A solar cell powers a satellite.
Because a solar cell is expensive, it is used to power weather stations.
A power line is expensive, because the weather station is remote.
A solar cell powers a traffic light.
A solar cell powers a buoy.
The sun directly heats objects.
Sunlight increases the temperature of a road.
Solar energy produces heat.
The heat powers a turbine.
The turbine makes electricity.
The heat heats buildings.
The heat heats water.
A new system is developing.
The system uses an array of mirrors.
The array reflects sunlight onto a tower.
A boiler is on the tower.
The sunlight heats the bucket.
The bucket produces steam.
The steam powers a turbine.
The turbine makes electricity.
Because the array angles towards the sun, the system is a tracking system.
A fixed solar heating system also captures sunlight.
An immobile solar heating system is a flat plate system. 
A flat plate system is simpler than a tracking system.
A flat plate system is more frequent than a tracking system.
A flat plate system is common in a sunny country. 
A flat plate system usually heats water.
In the winter, a flat plate system also heats a house.

A man owns a mine.
A gold mine contains poor ore.
Mining gold requires digging much.
Processing the ore requires expensive mining equipment.
Acquiring the gold requires processing the ore.
The gold is free, but acquiring the gold is expensive.
Acquiring the gold benefits the man, if the gold possesses great value.
Acquiring the gold benefits the man, if the mining equipment possesses only a little value.
Acquiring the gold harms the man, if the gold possesses little value.
Acquiring the gold harms the man, if the mining equipment possesses great value.
A gold mine in Utah closes, if the gold possesses only a little value.
The gold mine opens, if the gold possesses great value.
Solar radiation is like the poor ore.
Acquiring solar energy requires collecting the solar radiation.
Using the solar energy requires transforming the solar energy into electricity.
The solar collector collects the solar energy.
Similarly, the mining equipment collects the gold.
The solar collector is expensive.
The solar collector is more expensive than the solar radiation.
The solar heating system saves cash, if electricity possesses great value.
The solar heating system wastes cash, if electricity possesses only a little value. 
The gold mine in Utah closes, if the gold mine wastes cash.
Similarly, a solar heating system in Florida closes, if electricity possesses only a little value.
Because gold now possesses great value, the gold mine in Utah makes cash.
Similarly, electricity now possesses great value.
Because the electricity possesses great value, the solar heating system saves cash. 
The solar collector collects sunlight. It is like mining equipment.
Mining poor ore wastes cash, if the mining equipment possesses great value.
The mining equipment possesses longevity, if the mining equipment possesses simplicity. 
Similarly, if the solar collector possesses simplicity, the solar collector possesses longevity. 
Because the flat plate system possesses simplicity, the flat plate system saves cash.