An attack happens when one unit moves towards a tile containing another unit.
The two units involved must be from different civilizations.
An attack ends with one of the two units being destroyed.
Whichever unit survives remains in the location it had when the attack started. 
The attacking unit must have a positive attack strength.
A defending unit with zero defense strength dies immediately. 

The amount of damage a unit can sustain is measured in hit points.  
A unit dies when its hit points decrease to zero.
During an attack, units inflict damage on each other. 
Damage inflicted by the attacker depends on its attack strength.  
Damage inflicted by the defender depends on its defense strength. 

Damaged units enter combat with fewer hit points. 
Damaged units have fewer movement points per turn. 
A unit can be repaired by spending turns neither moving or attacking. 
On an open tile, repair restores one hit point per turn.  
Repair restores two hit points per turn for fortified units.  
Repair restores one third of their points if located in a city.

When several units on the same square are attacked, the unit with the largest defense strength is the defender.
If that defender loses, all units on the square are lost.  
If there are multiple units in a city or in a fortress, only the defender is lost. 
If a ship carrying other units is involved in combat, those units are destroyed if the ship is destroyed.

Defeating a unit inside a city without walls kills 1 citizen, if the attacker is a land unit. 
Once there are no defenders in a city, moving your unit inside the city makes it part of your civilization.
To do this, your unit must be a land unit or a helicopter.
Some buildings may be destroyed when a city is captures.
Capturing a city can also lead to discovering a new technology.

The type of unit determines what it can attack. 
Land units can only attack other land units. 
Ships can attack other ships.  
Ships are either surface ships or submarines. 
Surface ships can attack land units adjacent to them.
Submarines cannot attack land units. 
Helicopters can attack land and sea units. 
Helicopters can be attacked by any kind of unit.
Bombers can attack all land and sea units.  
Missles can attack any land and sea units.  
Land and sea units cannot attach bombers or missles. 
Only fighters can attack every kind of unit. 
An aircraft within a city or air base can be attacked by land units. 
Ships in port can be attacked by land units. 
Marines on a ship can attack other units.  
Other land units on a ship cannot attack anything until they disembark.

Units can be ordered to sentry.  
A sentry unit no longer asks for orders each turn. 
Sentry units can be reactivated by selecting them.  
Sentry units automatically activate when an enemy unit comes into view. Land units can be ordered to fortify.  
Fortification costs 1 movement point.  
Fortified units have the same advantage as land units within an unwalled city. 
A unit that has exhausted its movement points on a turn cannot fortify immediately.  

