Resources are needed to grow your civilization.
Resources are obtained from the terrain around your cities.
There are three kinds of resources.

The first resource are food points. Your population must consume food to survive.
Every citizen consumes two food points per turn.
The food points per turn consumed by settlers depends on the government.
Under anarchy, despotism, monarchy, and communism, settlers consume one food point per turn.
Under republic and democracy, settlers consume two food points per turn.
This food comes from the city that is supporting them.
Using a citizen to work a piece of terrain can produce food points.
Most terrain produces less than two food points per turn.
Some terrain has special properties so it produces more food points.
Improving a piece of terrain can improve its ability to produce food.
Every city can store food points.
Building a granary in a city enhances its capacity to store food points.
A city that produces more food than it requires accumulates the excess.
A city that produces less food than it requires draws food from storage.
The city population starves when the food storage is not sufficient to meet the food needed on a turn.
Settlers and citizens die until the food needed is equal to the food stored.
Settlers die first, followed by citizens.
When the food storage capacity becomes full, the population grows by one citizen.
This growth causes the food storage to become empty. 
Food storage capacity of a city increases with its population.
This means that each new citizen is more costly than the last.  

There are three buildings which enhance food production.
These are Granary, Harbor, and Supermarket.

The second resource are production points.
Every city generates at least one production point per turn.
Production points are consumed by units supported by the city.
These units include military units, settlers, workers, and engineers.
Each unit supported costs one production point per turn.
Under some governments, a few units are supported for free.
If city production drops too low, the units that cannot be supported are disbanded.
Extra production points are consumed by the process of building a product.

Cities can build units, buildings, or wonders. 
When the amount of production points used in creating a product reaches the cost of the product, that product is complete.
Products appear in their city when complete.
Completed units appear on the map.
Completed buildings are added to the city's list of structures.
Completed wonders are added to the city's list of structures.
Any extra production points after something is completed are applied towards the next project.
Each city can have only one of each type of building.
 Some buildings require that another is built first.
Each wonder can only be completed by one civilization per game.
If you produce units or buildings that you cannot support, they will be disbanded immediately after completion.
Building a settler consumes one citizen, in addition to production points.
If a city builds a settler with its last citizen, that city will disband when the settler is completed.

The product a city is building can be changed on any turn.
The accumulated production points are used towards the new product.
Switching products during construction can be costly.
No points are lost in switching between different types of units, different types of buildings, or different wonders.
Otherwise, half of the accumulated production points are lost.

You can spend gold to complete a project in one turn.
The purchase cost of the product depends on the total production needed.
As the accumulated production of the city rises, the purchase cost of the product falls.

Wonders cost even more to purchase than other types of products.
Cities can be directed to produce gold instead of other products.
A city producing gold will create one gold piece per turn for each production point it generates.
Some building types enhance production.
Building types that enhance production are Factory, Power Plant, Hydro Plant, Offshore Platform, Nuclear Plant, Manufacturing Plant.
Each city can have only one building that is a power plant.


By default, new cities start working on the best available defensive units.
When a city completes a unit, by default it starts working on another unit of the same type.
After completing a building or a wonder, by default a city starts working on a different type of building or wonder.

It is useful to classify your cities based on their terrain properties.
It is also useful to classify your cities based on how you intend to use them in your civilization.
Some cities might be built to provide defenses of your borders.
Some cities might be focused on research or on economic output.

The third resource are trade points.
Trade points come from commerce.
Some trade points are lost via corruption.
Corruption depends on the form of government.
Corruption in a city depends on the distance from the city to your civilization's capital.
Each city uses its trade points for three things.
Trade points can be converted to gold, which goes in the national treasury.
Trade points can be converted into luxury points.
Worker happiness can be increased by luxury points.
Trade points can be converted into science points.
Science points are consumed in discovering new technologies.
The conversion rates for trade points can only be changed on a civilization-wide basis.
The maximum conversion rates can depend on the form of government.
Gold and science points are accumulated across the entire civilization.
Luxury points are only accumulated in the city that produces them.
The trade point conversion rates represent an important tradeoff in running your civilization.
Three types of buildings directly affect trade.
These are Palace, Courthouse, and Super Highways.
Access to roads increases a city's trade points.
Working terrain that has rare commodities increases a city's trade points.  

Trade routes provide another source of trade points.
A trade route is established as follows.
Produce a caravan or freight in the city.  Send that unit to another city.
That city must either be at least eight squares away or belong to a different civilization.
The civilizations of the two cities must have an alliance.
Finally, give the make trade route command.
The city starting the trade route gets gold points and science points from the trade route.
The revenue depends on the trade already produced by the two cities.
The revenue is higher when the cities are further apart.
Acquiring the Railroad or Flight technologies reduces the revenue of a trade route.
Trade routes generate trade points for both cities every turn.
The amount generated by the trade route depends on the trade points from the terrain worked by both cities.
Trade routes generate more if the cities are on different continents.
Trade routes generate more if the cities are from different civilizations.

A city can have at most four trade routes.
Attempting to establish a fifth trade route will cause the trade route with the smallest revenue to be eliminated.
