Trade points come from commerce.
Cities can lose trade points.
As corruption in a city increases, the rate of trade point loss increases.
The corruption of a city depends on the form of government.
Corruption in a city depends on its distance from the capital.
A city uses its trade points for three things.
A city converts trade points to gold, which increases the current gold of the player.
A city can convert its trade points to luxury points.
Worker happiness can be increased by luxury points.
Trade points can be converted into science points.
Discovering new technologies consumes science points.
The conversion rate for trade points can only be changed on a civilization-wide basis.
The rates of conversion depend on the form of government.
Gold and science points are accumulated across the entire civilization.
Luxury points are only accumulated in the city that produces them.
The trade point conversion rates represent an important tradeoff in running your civilization.
Three types of buildings directly affect trade.
Building a Palace, Courthouse, or Super Highway increases trade production.
Access to roads increases a city's trade points.
Working terrain that has rare commodities increases a city's trade points.  

Trade routes produce trade points.
A trade route is established as follows.
Produce a caravan or freight in the city.  Send that unit to another city.
That city must either be at least eight squares away or belong to a different civilization.
The civilizations of the two cities must have an alliance.
Finally, give the make trade route command.
The city starting the trade route gets gold points and science points from the trade route.
The revenue depends on the trade already produced by the two cities.
The further the distance between the cities, the higher the revenue of the trade route.
Acquiring the Railroad or Flight technologies reduces the revenue of a trade route.
Trade routes produce trade points for both cities every turn.
The amount generated by the trade route depends on the trade points from the terrain worked by both cities.
Trade routes generate more if the cities are on different continents.
Trade routes produce more if the cities are from different civilizations.

A city can have at most four trade routes.
Attempting to establish a fifth trade route will cause the trade route with the smallest revenue to be eliminated.