The Troposphere -- weather breeder
In this layer are nearly all of the clouds.
Here is where weather occurs.
Air, heated by contact with the earth, rises and is replaced by colder air.
These vertical currents create horizontal winds at or near the surface of the earth.
Water, evaporated from the land and seas, rises with the ascending warm air.
As the air rises, the surrounding pressure lessens, so it steadily expands.
Expansion is a cooling process.
If the air rises high enough, it cools until condensation forms clouds.

Expansion of any gas is a cooling process.
Compression creates heat.
The cylinder and hose of a tire pump get hot as air is pumped and compressed.
The sudden expansion of gas rushing out of a spray can cools the tip.

Most air conditioners work on the same principle.
A gas is compressed in the part outside the house.
The heat of compression is given off to the outside air, and the gas condenses to a liquid.
The liquid is forced through a tiny nozzle and expands suddenly in the coils inside the house.
This expansion (and evaporation back to a gas) cools the coils and also the air which is blown over the coils into the room.

The troposphere has a kind of automatic air conditioner.
The primary heat pump is, of course, the sun.
It heats the earth's surface which, in turn, heats the air in contact with it.
The air expands, becomes lighter, and rises.
But the higher it rises the more it expands, because the pressure around it is steadily lessening.
And the more it expands, the more it cools.
This is an automatic cooling process which occurs without any loss of heat due to outside causes.
The rising air cools automatically at about 5.5 Fahrenheit for each 1000 feet it rises.
This is what happens when air rises up the side of a mountain.
When it goes down the other side, it begins compressing.
It warms up in doing so at the same rate (5.5 degrees Fahrenheit per 1000 feet) it cooled in rising.
This automatic temperature change in rising or falling air is called "adiabatic" warming or cooling.
Air need not be pushed up a mountain for this adiabatic change to take place.
Air rising over heated plains will also cool at the same rate of about 5.5 degrees Fahrenheit per 1000 foot rise.

